<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Dramas</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="dramas" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dramas</h2>
			<article id="otho-the-great" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem z3998:drama">
				<h3 epub:type="fulltitle">
					<span epub:type="title">Otho the Great</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A Tragedy in Five Acts</span>
				</h3>
				<section id="otho-the-great-dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
					<h4 xml:lang="la">Dramatis Personæ</h4>
					<ul>
						<li><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho the Great</b>, Emperor of Germany.</li>
						<li><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>, his Son.</li>
						<li><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>, Duke of Franconia.</li>
						<li><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert, a Knight</b>, favoured by Otho.</li>
						<li><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred, an Officer</b>, friend of Ludolph.</li>
						<li><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theodore</b>, an Officer.</li>
						<li><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>, an Officer.</li>
						<li><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>, an Abbot.</li>
						<li><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>, Prince of Hungary.</li>
						<li>An Hungarian Captain.</li>
						<li>Physician.</li>
						<li>Page.</li>
						<li>Nobles, Knights, Attendants, and Soldiers.</li>
						<li><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>, Niece of Otho.</li>
						<li><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>, Conrad’s Sister.</li>
						<li>Ladies and Attendants.</li>
						<li>Scene.⁠—The Castle of Friedburg, its vicinity, and the Hungarian Camp.</li>
						<li>Time.⁠—One Day.</li>
					</ul>
				</section>
				<section id="otho-the-great-act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
					<h4>Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h4>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-1-scene-1">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">An Apartment in the Castle</span></h5>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b></p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. So, I am safe emerged from these broils!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amid the wreck of thousands I am whole;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For every crime I have a laurel-wreath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For every lie a lordship. Nor yet has</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My ship of fortune furl’d her silken sails,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let her glide on! This danger’d neck is saved,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By dexterous policy, from the rebel’s axe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of my ducal palace not one stone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is bruised by the Hungarian petards.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Toil hard, ye slaves, and from the miser-earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bring forth once more my bullion, treasured deep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With all my jewel’d salvers, silver and gold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And precious goblets that make rich the wine.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But why do I stand babbling to myself?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where is Auranthe? I have news for her</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b></p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Conrad! what tidings? Good, if I may guess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From your alert eyes and high-lifted brows.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What tidings of the battle? Albert? Ludolph? Otho?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. You guess aright. And, sister, slurring o’er</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our by-gone quarrels, I confess my heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is beating with a child’s anxiety.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make our golden fortune known to you.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. So serious?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Yes, so serious, that before</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I utter even the shadow of a hint</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Concerning what will make that sin-worn cheek</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blush joyous blood through every lineament,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You must make here a solemn vow to me.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. I pr’ythee, Conrad, do not overact</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The hypocrite. What vow would you impose?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Trust me for once. That you may be assured</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis not confiding to a broken reed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A poor court-bankrupt, outwitted and lost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Revolve these facts in your acutest mood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In such a mood as now you listen to me:⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A few days since, I was an open rebel,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against the Emperor, had suborn’d his son,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drawn off his nobles to revolt,⁠—and shown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Contented fools causes for discontent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fresh hatched in my ambition’s eagle-nest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So thrived I as a rebel,⁠—and, behold!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now I am Otho’s favourite, his dear friend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His right hand, his brave Conrad.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. I confess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You have intrigued with these unsteady times</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To admiration; but to be a favourite⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. I saw my moment. The Hungarians,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Collected silently in holes and corners,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Appear’d, a sudden host, in the open day.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I should have perish’d in our empire’s wreck,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, calling interest loyalty, swore faith</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To most believing Otho; and so help’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His blood-stain’d ensigns to the victory</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In yesterday’s hard fight, that it has turn’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The edge of his sharp wrath to eager kindness.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. So far yourself. But what is this to me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More than that I am glad? I gratulate you.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Yes, sister, but it does regard you greatly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nearly, momentously,⁠—aye, painfully!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make me this vow⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Concerning whom or what?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Albert!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. I would inquire somewhat of him:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You had a letter from me touching him?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No treason ’gainst his head in deed or word!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Surely you spared him at my earnest prayer?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Give me the letter⁠—it should not exist!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. At one pernicious charge of the enemy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I, for a moment-whiles, was prisoner ta’en</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And rifled,⁠—stuff! the horses’ hoofs have minced it!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. He is alive?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. He is! but here make oath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To alienate him from your scheming brain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divorce him from your solitary thoughts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cloud him in such utter banishment,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That when his person meets again your eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your vision shall quite lose its memory,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wander past him as through vacancy.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. I’ll not be perjured.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. No, nor great, nor mighty;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You would not wear a crown, or rule a kingdom.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To you it is indifferent.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. What means this?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. You’ll not be perjured! Go to Albert then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That camp-mushroom⁠—dishonour of our house.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Go, page his dusty heels upon a march,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Furbish his jingling baldric while he sleeps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And share his mouldy ration in a siege.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet stay,⁠—perhaps a charm may call you back,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make the widening circlets of your eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sparkle with healthy fevers.⁠—The Emperor</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath given consent that you should marry Ludolph!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Can it be, brother? For a golden crown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With a queen’s awful lips I doubly thank you!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This is to wake in Paradise! Farewell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou clod of yesterday⁠—’twas not myself!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not till this moment did I ever feel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My spirit’s faculties! I’ll flatter you</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For this, and be you ever proud of it;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou, Jove-like, struck’dst thy forehead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from the teeming marrow of thy brain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I spring complete Minerva! but the prince⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His highness Ludolph⁠—where is he?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. I know not:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When, lackying my counsel at a beck,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The rebel lords, on bended knees, received</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Emperor’s pardon, Ludolph kept aloof,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sole, in a stiff, fool-hardy, sulky pride;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet, for all this, I never saw a father</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In such a sickly longing for his son.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We shall soon see him, for the Emperor</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He will be here this morning.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. That I heard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among the midnight rumours from the camp.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. You give up Albert to me?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Harm him not!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>E’en for his highness Ludolph’s sceptry hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I would not Albert suffer any wrong.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Have I not laboured, plotted⁠—?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. See you spare him:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor be pathetic, my kind benefactor!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On all the many bounties of your hand,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas for yourself you laboured⁠—not for me!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do you not count, when I am queen, to take</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Advantage of your chance discoveries</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of my poor secrets, and so hold a rod</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over my life?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Let not this slave⁠—this villain⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be cause of feud between us. See! he comes!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look, woman, look, your Albert is quite safe!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In haste it seems. Now shall I be in the way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wish’d with silent curses in my grave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or side by side with ’whelmed mariners.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Fair on your graces fall this early morrow!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So it is like to do without my prayers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For your right noble names, like favourite tunes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have fallen full frequent from our Emperor’s lips,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>High commented with smiles.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Noble Albert!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">aside</span>)</b>. Noble!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Such salutation argues a glad heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In our prosperity. We thank you, sir.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Lady!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O, would to Heaven your poor servant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could do you better service than mere words!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But I have other greeting than mine own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From no less man than Otho, who has sent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This ring as pledge of dearest amity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis chosen I hear from Hymen’s jewelry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And you will prize it, lady, I doubt not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond all pleasures past, and all to come.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To you great duke⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. To me! What of me, ha?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. What pleased your grace to say?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Your message, sir!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. You mean not this to me?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Sister, this way;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For there shall be no “gentle Alberts” now,</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Aside.</p>
					<p>
						<span>No “sweet Auranthes!”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction" xml:lang="la">solus</span>)</b>. The duke is out of temper; if he knows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More than a brother of his sister ought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I should not quarrel with his peevishness.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Auranthe⁠—Heaven preserve her always fair!⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is in the heady, proud, ambitious vein;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I bicker not with her,⁠—bid her farewell!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She has taken flight from me, then let her soar,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He is a fool who stands at pining gaze!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But for poor Ludolph, he is food for sorrow:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No leveling bluster of my licensed thoughts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No military swagger of my mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can smother from myself the wrong I’ve done him,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without design indeed,⁠—yet it is so,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And opiate for the conscience have I none!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit.</p>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-1-scene-2">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">The Court-Yard of the Castle</span></h5>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Martial Music. Enter, from, the outer gate, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>, Nobles, Knights, and Attendants. The Soldiers halt at the gate, with Banners in sight.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Where is my noble Herald?</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>, from the Castle, attended by two Knights and Servants. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b> following.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i3">Well, hast told Auranthe our intent imperial?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lest our rent banners, too o’ the sudden shown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should fright her silken casements, and dismay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her household to our lack of entertainment.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A victory!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. God save illustrious Otho!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Aye, Conrad, it will pluck out all gray hairs;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is the best physician for the spleen;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The courtliest inviter to a feast;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The subtlest excuser of small faults;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And a nice judge in the age and smack of wine.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter from the Castle, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>, followed by Pages, holding up her robes, and a train of Women. She kneels.</p>
					<p>
						<span>Hail my sweet hostess! I do thank the stars,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or my good soldiers, or their ladies’ eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, after such a merry battle fought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I can, all safe in body and in soul,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kiss your fair hand and lady fortune’s too.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My ring! now, on my life, it doth rejoice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These lips to feel ’t on this soft ivory!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Keep it, my brightest daughter; it may prove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The little prologue to a line of kings.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I strove against thee and my hot-blood son,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dull blockhead that I was to be so blind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But now my sight is clear; forgive me, lady.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. My lord, I was a vassal to your frown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now your favour makes me but more humble;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In wintry winds the simple snow is safe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But fadeth at the greeting of the sun:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto thine anger I might well have spoken,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Taking on me a woman’s privilege,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But this so sudden kindness makes me dumb.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. What need of this? Enough, if you will be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A potent tutoress to my wayward boy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And teach him, what it seems his nurse could not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To say, for once, I thank you! Sigifred!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. He has not yet returned, my gracious liege.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. What then! No tidings of my friendly Arab?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. None, mighty Otho.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[To one of his Knights who goes out.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i3">Send forth instantly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An hundred horsemen from my honoured gates,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To scour the plains and search the cottages.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cry a reward, to him who shall first bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>News of that vanished Arabian,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A full-heap’d helmet of the purest gold.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. More thanks, good Conrad; for, except my son’s,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is no face I rather would behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than that same quick-eyed pagan’s. By the saints,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This coming night of banquets must not light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her dazzling torches; nor the music breathe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Smooth, without clashing cymbal, tones of peace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in-door melodies: nor the ruddy wine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ebb spouting to the lees; if I pledge not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In my first cup, that Arab!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Mighty Monarch,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I wonder not this stranger’s victor-deeds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So hang upon your spirit. Twice in the fight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It was my chance to meet his olive brow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Triumphant in the enemy’s shatter’d rhomb;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, to say truth, in any Christian arm</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I never saw such prowess.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Did you ever?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O, ’tis a noble boy!⁠—tut!⁠—what do I say?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I mean a triple Saladin, whose eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When in the glorious scuffle they met mine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seem’d to say⁠—“Sleep, old man, in safety sleep;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am the victory!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Pity he’s not here.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. And my son too, pity he is not here.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lady Auranthe, I would not make you blush,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But can you give a guess where Ludolph is?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know you not of him?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Indeed, my liege, no secret⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Nay, nay, without more words, dost know of him?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. I would I were so over-fortunate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both for his sake and mine, and to make glad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A father’s ears with tidings of his son.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. I see ’tis like to be a tedious day.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were Theodore and Gonfred and the rest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sent forth with my commands?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Aye, my lord.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. And no news! No news! ’Faith! ’tis very strange</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He thus avoids us. Lady, is ’t not strange?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will he be truant to you too? It is a shame.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Will ’t please your highness enter, and accept,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The unworthy welcome of your servant’s house?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Leaving your cares to one whose diligence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May in few hours make pleasures of them all.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Not so tedious, Conrad. No, no, no,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I must see Ludolph or the⁠—What’s that shout?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Voices without</b>. Huzza! huzza! Long live the Emperor!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Other voices</b>. Fall back! Away there!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Say what noise is that?</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b> advancing from the hack of the Stage whither he had hastened on hearing the cheers of the soldiery.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. It is young Gersa, the Hungarian prince,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pick’d like a red stag from the fallow herd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of prisoners. Poor prince, forlorn he steps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Slow, and demure, and proud in his despair.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If I may judge by his so tragic bearing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His eyes not downcast, and his folded arm,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He doth this moment wish himself asleep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among his fallen captains on yon plains.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>, in chains, and guarded.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Well said. Sir Albert.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Not a word of greeting,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No welcome to a princely visitor,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Most mighty Otho? Will not my great host</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vouchsafe a syllable, before he bids</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His gentlemen conduct me with all care</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To some securest lodging⁠—cold perhaps!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. What mood is this? Hath fortune touch’d thy brain?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. O kings and princes of this fev’rous world,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What abject things, what mockeries must ye be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What nerveless minions of safe palaces!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When here, a monarch, whose proud foot is used</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To fallen princes’ necks, as to his stirrup,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Must needs exclaim that I am mad forsooth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because I cannot flatter with bent knees</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My conqueror!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Gersa, I think you wrong me:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I think I have a better fame abroad.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. I pr’ythee mock me not with gentle speech,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, as a favour, bid me from thy presence;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let me no longer be the wondering food</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all these eyes; pr’ythee command me hence!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Do not mistake me, Gersa. That you may not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come, fair Auranthe, try if your soft hands</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can manage those hard rivets to set free</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So brave a prince and soldier.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">sets him free</span>)</b>. Welcome task!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. I am wound up in deep astonishment!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thank you, fair lady. Otho! emperor!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You rob me of myself; my dignity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is now your infant; I am a weak child.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Give me your hand, and let this kindly grasp</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Live in our memories.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. In mine it will.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I blush to think of my unchasten’d tongue;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But I was haunted by the monstrous ghost</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all our slain battalions. Sire, reflect,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pardon you will grant, that, at this hour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bruised remnants of our stricken camp</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are huddling undistinguish’d my dear friends,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With common thousands, into shallow graves.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Enough, most noble Gersa. You are free</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To cheer the brave remainder of your host</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By your own healing presence, and that too,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not as their leader merely, but their king;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, as I hear, the wily enemy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who eased the crownet from your infant brows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bloody Taraxa, is among the dead.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Then I retire, so generous Otho please,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bearing with me a weight of benefits</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too heavy to be borne.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. It is not so;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still understand me, King of Hungary,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor judge my open purposes awry.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though I did hold you high in my esteem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For your self’s sake, I do not personate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The stage-play emperor to entrap applause,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To set the silly sort o’ the world agape,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make the politic smile; no, I have heard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How in the Council you condemn’d this war,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Urging the perfidy of broken faith,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For that I am your friend.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. If ever, sire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You are my enemy, I dare here swear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twill not be Gersa’s fault. Otho, farewell!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Will you return, Prince, to our banqueting?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. As to my father’s board I will return.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Conrad, with all due ceremony, give</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The prince a regal escort to his camp;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Albert, go thou and bear him company.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gersa, farewell!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. All happiness attend you!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Return with what good speed you may; for soon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We must consult upon our terms of peace.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b> with others.</p>
					<p>
						<span>And thus a marble column do I build</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To prop my empire’s dome. Conrad, in thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I have another steadfast one, to uphold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The portals of my state; and, for my own</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pre-eminence and safety, I will strive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To keep thy strength upon its pedestal.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, without thee, this day I might have been</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A show-monster about the streets of Prague,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In chains, as just now stood that noble prince:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then to me no mercy had been shown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For when the conquer’d lion is once dungeon’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who lets him forth again? or dares to give</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An old lion sugar-cakes of mild reprieve?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to thine ear alone I make confession,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to all here, as, by experience,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I know how the great basement of all power</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is frankness, and a true tongue to the world;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And how intriguing secrecy is proof</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of fear and weakness, and a hollow state.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conrad, I owe thee much.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. To kiss that hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My emperor, is ample recompense,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For a mere act of duty.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Thou art wrong;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For what can any man on earth do more?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We will make trial of your house’s welcome,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My bright Auranthe!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. How is Friedburg honoured!</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b> and six Monks.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. The benison of heaven on your head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Imperial Otho!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Who stays me? Speak! Quick!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Pause but one moment, mighty conqueror!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the threshold of this house of joy.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Pray, do not prose, good Ethelbert, but speak</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What is your purpose.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. The restoration of some captive maids,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Devoted to Heaven’s pious ministries,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, driven forth from their religious cells,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And kept in thraldom by our enemy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When late this province was a lawless spoil,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still weep amid the wild Hungarian camp,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though hemm’d around by thy victorious arms.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Demand the holy sisterhood in our name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Gersa’s tents. Farewell, old Ethelbert.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. The saints will bless you for this pious care.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Daughter, your hand; Ludolph’s would fit it best.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Ho! let the music sound!</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Music. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b> raises his hands, as in benediction of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. <i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i> severally. The scene closes on them.</p>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-1-scene-3">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">The Country, with the Castle in the Distance</span></h5>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. You have my secret; let it not be breathed.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. Still give me leave to wonder that the Prince</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ludolph and the swift Arab are the same;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still to rejoice that ’twas a German arm</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Death doing in a turban’d masquerade.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. The emperor must not know it, Sigifred.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. I pr’ythee, why? What happier hour of time</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could thy pleased star point down upon from heaven</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With silver index, bidding thee make peace?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Still it must not be known, good Sigifred;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The star may point oblique.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. If Otho knew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His son to be that unknown Mussulman,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After whose spurring heels he sent me forth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With one of his well-pleased Olympian oaths,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The charters of man’s greatness, at this hour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He would be watching round the castle walls,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, like an anxious warder, strain his sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the first glimpse of such a son return’d⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ludolph, that blast of the Hungarians,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Saracenic meteor of the fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That silent fury, whose fell scimitar</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kept danger all aloof from Otho’s head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And left him space for wonder.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Say no more.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not as a swordsman would I pardon claim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as a son. The bronzed centurion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long toil’d in foreign wars, and whose high deeds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are shaded in a forest of tall spears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Known only to his troop, hath greater plea</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of favour with my sire than I can have.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. My lord, forgive me that I cannot see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How this proud temper with clear reason squares.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What made you then, with such an anxious love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hover around that life, whose bitter days</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You vext with bad revolt? Was ’t opium,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or the mad-fumed wine? Nay, do not frown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I rather would grieve with you than upbraid.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. I do believe you. No, ’twas not to make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A father his son’s debtor, or to heal</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His deep heart-sickness for a rebel child.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas done in memory of my boyish days,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Poor cancel for his kindness to my youth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For all his calming of my childish griefs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all his smiles upon my merriment.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No, not a thousand foughten fields could sponge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those days paternal from my memory,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though now upon my head he heaps disgrace.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. My prince, you think too harshly⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Can I so?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath he not gall’d my spirit to the quick?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with a sullen rigour obstinate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pour’d out a phial of wrath upon my faults?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hunted me as the Tartar does the boar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Driven me to the very edge o’ the world,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And almost put a price upon my head?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. Remember how he spared the rebel lords.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Yes, yes, I know he hath a noble nature</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That cannot trample on the fallen. But his</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is not the only proud heart in his realm.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He hath wrong’d me, and I have done him wrong;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He hath loved me, and I have shown him kindness;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We should be almost equal.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. Yet, for all this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I would you had appear’d among those lords,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ta’en his favour.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Ha! till now I thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My friend had held poor Ludolph’s honour dear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What! would you have me sue before his throne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And kiss the courtier’s missal, its silk steps?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or hug the golden housings of his steed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amid a camp, whose steeled swarms I dared</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But yesterday? And, at the trumpet sound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bow like some unknown mercenary’s flag</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And lick the soiled grass? No, no, my friend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I would not, I, be pardon’d in the heap,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bless indemnity with all that scum,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those men I mean, who on my shoulders propp’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their weak rebellion, winning me with lies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pitying forsooth my many wrongs;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Poor self-deceived wretches, who must think</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each one himself a king in embryo,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because some dozen vassals cried⁠—my lord!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cowards, who never knew their little hearts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till flurried danger held the mirror up,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then they own’d themselves without a blush,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Curling, like spaniels, round my father’s feet.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such things deserted me and are forgiven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While I, less guilty, am an outcast still,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And will be, for I love such fair disgrace.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. I know the clear truth; so would Otho see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For he is just and noble. Fain would I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be pleader for you⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. He’ll hear none of it;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You know his temper, hot, proud, obstinate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Endanger not yourself so uselessly.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will encounter his thwart spleen myself,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To-day, at the Duke Conrad’s, where he keeps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His crowded state after the victory,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There will I be, a most unwelcome guest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And parley with him, as a son should do,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who doubly loathes a father’s tyranny;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tell him how feeble is that tyranny;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How the relationship of father and son</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is no more valid than a silken leash</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where lions tug adverse, if love grow not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From interchanged love through many years.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aye, and those turreted Franconian walls,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like to a jealous casket, hold my pearl⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My fair Auranthe! Yes, I will be there.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. Be not so rash; wait till his wrath shall pass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Until his royal spirit softly ebbs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Self-influenced; then, in his morning dreams</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He will forgive thee, and awake in grief</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To have not thy good morrow.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b> Yes, to-day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I must be there, while her young pulses beat no</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among the new-plumed minions of the war.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have you seen her of late? No? Auranthe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Franconia’s fair sister, ’tis I mean.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She should be paler for my troublous days⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there it is⁠—my father’s iron lips</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have sworn divorcement ’twixt me and my right.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">aside</span>)</b>. Auranthe! I had hoped this whim had pass’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. And, Sigifred, with all his love of justice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When will he take that grandchild in his arms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, by my love I swear, shall soon be his?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This reconcilement is impossible,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For see⁠—but who are these?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. They are messengers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From our great emperor; to you, I doubt not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For couriers are abroad to seek you out.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theodore</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theodore</b>. Seeing so many vigilant eyes explore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The province to invite your highness back</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To your high dignities, we are too happy.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>. We have eloquence to colour justly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The emperor’s anxious wishes.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Go. I follow you.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theodore</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span>I play the prude: it is but venturing⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why should he be so earnest? Come, my friend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let us to Friedburg castle.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="otho-the-great-act-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
					<h4>Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h4>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-2-scene-1">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">An Antechamber in the Castle</span></h5>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. No more advices, no more cautioning;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I leave it all to fate⁠—to any thing!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cannot square my conduct to time, place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or circumstance: to me ’tis all a mist!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. I say no more.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. It seems I am to wait</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here in the anteroom;⁠—that may be a trifle.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You see now how I dance attendance here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without that tyrant temper, you so blame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Snapping the rein. You have medicined me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With good advices; and I here remain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In this most honourable anteroom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your patient scholar.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. Do not wrong me, Prince.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Heavens, I’d rather kiss Duke Conrad’s slipper,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When in the morning he doth yawn with pride,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than see you humbled but a half-degree!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Truth is, the Emperor would fain dismiss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Nobles ere he sees you.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b> from the Council-room.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Well, sir! what?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>. Great honour to the Prince! The Emperor,</span>
						<span>Hearing that his brave son had reappeared,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Instant dismiss’d the Council from his sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Jove fans off the clouds. Even now they pass.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the Nobles from the Council-room. They cross the Stage, bowing with respect to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>, he frowning on them. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b> follows. <i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i> Nobles.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Not the discoloured poisons of a fen,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which he, who breathes, feels warning of his death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could taste so nauseous to the bodily sense,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As these prodigious sycophants disgust</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The soul’s fine palate.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Princely Ludolph, hail!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Welcome, thou younger sceptre to the realm!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strength to thy virgin crownet’s golden buds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That they, against the winter of thy sire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May burst, and swell, and flourish round thy brows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Maturing to a weighty diadem!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet be that hour far off; and may he live,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who waits for thee, as the chapp’d earth for rain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Set my life’s star! I have lived long enough,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since under my glad roof, propitiously,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Father and son each other re-possess.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Fine wording, Duke! but words could never yet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forestall the fates; have you not learnt that yet?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let me look well: your features are the same;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your gait the same; your hair of the same shade;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As one I knew some passed weeks ago,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who sung far different notes into mine ears.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I have mine own particular comments on ’t;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You have your own, perhaps.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. My gracious Prince,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All men may err. In truth I was deceived</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In your great father’s nature, as you were.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had I known that of him I have since known.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what you soon will learn, I would have turn’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My sword to my own throat, rather than held</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its threatening edge against a good King’s quiet:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or with one word fever’d you, gentle Prince,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who seem’d to me, as rugged times then went,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Indeed too much oppress’d. May I be bold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To tell the Emperor you will haste to him?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Your Dukedom’s privilege will grant so much.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span>He’s very close to Otho, a tight leech!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your hand⁠—I go! Ha! here the thunder comes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sullen against the wind! If in two angry brows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My safety lies, then Sigifred, I’m safe.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Will you make Titan play the lackey-page</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To chattering pigmies? I would have you know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That such neglect of our high Majesty</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Annuls all feel of kindred. What is son,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or friend⁠—or brother⁠—or all ties of blood,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When the whole kingdom, centred in ourself,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is rudely slighted? Who am I to wait?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Peter’s chair! I have upon my tongue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A word to fright the proudest spirit here!⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Death!⁠—and slow tortures to the hardy fool,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who dares take such large charter from our smiles!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conrad, we would be private! Sigifred!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Off! And none pass this way on pain of death!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. This was but half expected, my good sire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet I am grieved at it, to the full height,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As though my hopes of favour had been whole.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. How you indulge yourself! What can you hope for?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Nothing, my liege, I have to hope for nothing.</span>
						<span>I come to greet you as a loving son,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then depart, if I may be so free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seeing that blood of yours in my warm veins</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has not yet mitigated into milk.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. What would you, sir?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. A lenient banishment;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So please you let me unmolested pass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This Conrad’s gates, to the wide air again.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I want no more. A rebel wants no more.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. And shall I let a rebel loose again</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To muster kites and eagles ’gainst my head?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No, obstinate boy, you shall be kept caged up,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Served with harsh food, with scum for Sunday-drink.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Indeed!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. And chains too heavy for your life:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll choose a jailer, whose swart monstrous face</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall be a hell to look upon, and she⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Ha!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Shall be your fair Auranthe.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Amaze! Amaze!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. To-day you marry her.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. This is a sharp jest!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. No. None at all. When have I said a lie?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. If I sleep not, I am a waking wretch.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Not a word more. Let me embrace my child.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. I dare not. ’Twould pollute so good a father!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O heavy crime! that your son’s blinded eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could not see all his parent’s love aright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As now I see it. Be not kind to me⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Punish me not with favour.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Are you sure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ludolph, you have no saving plea in store?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. My father, none!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Then you astonish me.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. No, I have no plea. Disobedience,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rebellion, obstinacy, blasphemy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are all my counsellors. If they can make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My crooked deeds show good and plausible,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then grant me loving pardon, but not else,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Good Gods! not else, in any way, my liege!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. You are a most perplexing noble boy.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. You not less a perplexing noble father.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Well, you shall have free passport through the gates.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Farewell!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Farewell! and by these tears believe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And still remember, I repent in pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All my misdeeds!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Ludolph, I will! I will!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, Ludolph, ere you go, I would inquire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If you in all your wandering, ever met</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A certain Arab haunting in these parts.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. No, my good lord, I cannot say I did.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Make not your father blind before his time;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor let these arms paternal hunger more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For an embrace, to dull the appetite</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of my great love for thee, my supreme child!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come close, and let me breathe into thine ear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I knew you through disguise. You are the Arab!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You can’t deny it.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Embracing him.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Happiest of days!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. We’ll make it so.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. ’Stead of one fatted calf</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ten hecatombs shall bellow out their last,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Smote ’twixt the horns by the death-stunning mace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Mars, and all the soldiery shall feast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nobly as Nimrod’s masons, when the towers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Nineveh new kiss’d the parted clouds!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Large as a God speak out, where all is thine.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Ay, father, but the fire in my sad breast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is quench’d with inward tears! I must rejoice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For you, whose wings so shadow over me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In tender victory, but for myself</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I still must mourn. The fair Auranthe mine!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too great a boon! I pr’y thee let me ask</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What more than I know of could so have changed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your purpose touching her.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. At a word, this:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In no deed did you give me more offence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than your rejection of Erminia.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To my appalling, I saw too good proof</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of your keen-eyed suspicion,⁠—she is naught!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. You are convinced?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Ay, spite of her sweet looks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O, that my brother’s daughter should so fall!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her fame has pass’d into the grosser lips</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of soldiers in their cups.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. ’Tis very sad.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. No more of her. Auranthe⁠—Ludolph, come!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This marriage be the bond of endless peace!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i>.</p>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-2-scene-2">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">The Entrance of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa’s</b> Tent in the Hungarian Camp</span></h5>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Where! where! where shall I find a messenger!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A trusty soul? A good man in the camp?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall I go myself? Monstrous wickedness!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O cursed Conrad! devilish Auranthe!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here is proof palpable as the bright sun!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O for a voice to reach the Emperor’s ears!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Shouts in the camp.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter an <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hungarian Captain</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Captain</b>. Fair prisoner, you hear those joyous shouts?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The king⁠—aye, now our king,⁠—but still your slave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Young Gersa, from a short captivity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has just return’d. He bids me say, bright dame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That even the homage of his ranged chiefs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cures not his keen impatience to behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such beauty once again. What ails you, lady?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Say, is not that a German, yonder? There!</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Captain</b>. Methinks by his stout bearing he should be⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yes⁠—it is Albert; a brave German knight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And much in the Emperor’s favour.</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. I would fain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inquire of friends and kinsfolk; how they fared</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In these rough times. Brave soldier, as you pass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To royal Gersa with my humble thanks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will you send yonder knight to me?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Captain</b>. I will.</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Yes, he was ever known to be a man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Frank, open, generous; Albert I may trust.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O proof! proof! proof! Albert’s an honest man;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not Ethelbert the monk, if he were here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would I hold more trustworthy. Now!</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Good Gods!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lady Erminia! are you prisoner</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In this beleaguer’d camp? Or are you here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of your own will? You pleased to send for me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Venus, ’tis a pity I knew not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your plight before, and, by her Son, I swear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To do you every service you can ask.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What would the fairest⁠—?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Albert, will you swear?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. I have. Well?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Albert, you have fame to lose.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If men, in court and camp, lie not outright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You should be, from a thousand, chosen forth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To do an honest deed. Shall I confide⁠—?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Aye, any thing to me, fair creature. Do;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dictate my task. Sweet woman,⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Truce with that.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You understand me not; and, in your speech,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I see how far the slander is abroad.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without proof could you think me innocent?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Lady, I should rejoice to know you so.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. If you have any pity for a maid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Suffering a daily death from evil tongues;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Any compassion for that Emperor’s niece,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, for your bright sword and clear honesty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lifted you from the crowd of common men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the lap of honour;⁠—save me, knight!</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. How? Make it clear; if it be possible,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I by the banner of <abbr>St.</abbr> Maurice swear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To right you.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Possible!⁠—Easy. O my heart!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This letter’s not so soil’d but you may read it;⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Possible! There⁠—that letter! Read⁠—read it.</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Gives him a letter.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b> (reading).</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p>“To the Duke Conrad.⁠—Forget the threat you made at parting, and I will forget to send the Emperor letters and papers of yours I have become possessed of. His life is no trifle to me; his death you shall find none to yourself.” (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Speaks to himself</span>.) ’Tis me⁠—my life that’s pleaded for! (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads</span>.) “He, for his own sake, will be dumb as the grave. Erminia has my shame fix’d upon her, sure as a wen. We are safe.</p>
						<footer>
							<p><b epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>.”</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">A she-devil! A dragon! I her imp!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fire of Hell! Auranthe⁠—lewd demon!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where got you this? Where? When?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. I found it in the tent, among some spoils</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, being noble, fell to Gersa’s lot.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come in, and see.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[They go in and return.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Villainy! Villainy!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conrad’s sword, his corselet, and his helm,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And his letter. Caitiff, he shall feel⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. I see you are thunderstruck. Haste, haste away!</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. O, I am tortured by this villainy.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. You needs must be. Carry it swift to Otho;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tell him, moreover, I am prisoner</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here in this camp, where all the sisterhood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forced from their quiet cells, are parcel’d out</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For slaves among these Huns. Away! Away!</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. I am gone.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Swift be your steed! Within this hour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Emperor will see it.</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Ere I sleep:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I can swear.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Hurries out.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa (without)</b>. Brave captains! thanks. Enough</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of loyal homage now!</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Hail, royal Hun!</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. What means this, fair one? Why in such alarm?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who was it hurried by me so distract?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It seem’d you were in deep discourse together;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your doctrine has not been so harsh to him</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As to my poor deserts. Come, come, be plain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am no jealous fool to kill you both,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or, for such trifles, rob th’ adorned world</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of such a beauteous vestal.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. I grieve, my Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hear you condescend to ribald-phrase.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. This is too much! Hearken, my lady pure!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Silence! and hear the magic of a name⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Erminia! I am she⁠—the Emperor’s niece!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Praised be the Heavens, I now dare own myself!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Erminia! Indeed! I’ve heard of her.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pr’ythee, fair lady, what chance brought you here?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Ask your own soldiers.</span>
						<br/>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. And you dare own your name.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For loveliness you may⁠—and for the rest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My vein is not censorious.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Alas! poor me!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis false indeed.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Indeed you are too fair:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The swan, soft leaning on her fledgy breast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When to the stream she launches, looks not back</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With such a tender grace; nor are her wings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So white as your soul is, if that but be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Twin picture to your face, Erminia!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To-day, for the first day, I am a king,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet would I give my unworn crown away</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To know you spotless.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Trust me one day more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Generously, without more certain guarantee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than this poor face you deign to praise so much;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After that, say and do whate’er you please.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If I have any knowledge of you, sir,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I think, nay I am sure, you will grieve much</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hear my story. O be gentle to me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For I am sick and faint with many wrongs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tired out, and weary-worn with contumelies.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Poor lady!</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Gentle Prince, ’tis false indeed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Good morrow, holy father! I have had</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your prayers, though I look’d for you in vain.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Blessings upon you, daughter! Sure you look</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too cheerful for these foul pernicious days.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Young man, you heard this virgin say ’twas false,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis false, I say. What! can you not employ</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your temper elsewhere, ’mong those burly tents,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But you must taunt this dove, for she hath lost</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Eagle Otho to beat off assault?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fie! Fie! But I will be her guard myself,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ the Emperor’s name. I here demand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Herself, and all her sisterhood. She false!</span>
						<p>
							<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Peace! peace, old man! I cannot think she is.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Whom I have known from her first infancy,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Baptized her in the bosom of the Church,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Watch’d her, as anxious husbandmen the grain,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From the first shoot till the unripe mid-May,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then to the tender ear of her June days,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which, lifting sweet abroad its timid green,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is blighted by the touch of calumny;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>You cannot credit such a monstrous tale.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. I cannot. Take her. Fair Erminia,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I follow you to Friedburg,⁠—is ’t not so?</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Ay, so we purpose.</span>
							<br/>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Daughter, do you so?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How’s this? I marvel! Yet you look not mad.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. I have good news to tell you, Ethelbert.</span>
							<br/>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Ho! ho, there! Guards!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Your blessing, father! Sweet Erminia,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Believe me, I am well nigh sure⁠—</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Farewell.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Short time will show.</span>
						</p>
						<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Enter Chiefs.</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1">Yes, father Ethelbert,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I have news precious as we pass along.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Dear daughter, you shall guide me.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. To no ill.</span>
							<br/>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Command an escort to the Friedburg lines,</span>
						</p>
						<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i> Chiefs.</p>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Pray let me lead. Fair lady, forget not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gersa, how he believed you innocent.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I follow you to Friedburg with all speed.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i>.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="otho-the-great-act-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
					<h4>Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></h4>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-3-scene-1">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">The Country</span></h5>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. O that the earth were empty, as when Cain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had no perplexity to hide his head!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or that the sword of some brave enemy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had put a sudden stop to my hot breath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hurl’d me down the illimitable gulf</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of times past, unremember’d! Better so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than thus fast-limed in a cursed snare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The white limbs of a wanton. This the end</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of an aspiring life! My boyhood past</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In feud with wolves and bears, when no eye saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The solitary warfare, fought for love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of honour ’mid the growling wilderness.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My sturdier youth, maturing to the sword,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Won by the syren-trumpets, and the ring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of shields upon the pavement, when bright mail’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Henry the Fowler pass’d the streets of Prague.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was ’t to this end I louted and became</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The menial of Mars, and held a spear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sway’d by command, as corn is by the wind?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is it for this, I now am lifted up</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Europe’s throned Emperor, to see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My honour be my executioner,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My love of fame, my prided honesty</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Put to the torture for confessional?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then the damn’d crime of blurting to the world</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A woman’s secret!⁠—Though a fiend she be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too tender of my ignominious life;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But then to wrong the generous Emperor</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In such a searching point, were to give up</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My soul for foot-ball at Hell’s holiday!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I must confess,⁠—and cut my throat,⁠—to-day?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To-morrow? Ho! some wine!</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. A fine humour⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Who goes there? Count Sigifred? Ha! ha!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. What, man, do you mistake the hollow sky</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For a throng’d tavern,⁠—and these stubbed trees</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For old serge hangings,⁠—me, your humble friend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For a poor waiter? Why, man, how you stare!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What gipsies have you been carousing with?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No, no more wine; methinks you’ve had enough.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. You well may laugh and banter. What a fool</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An injury may make of a staid man!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You shall know all anon.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. Some tavern brawl?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. ’Twas with some people out of common reach;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Revenge is difficult.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. I am your friend;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We meet again to-day, and can confer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon it. For the present I’m in haste.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Whither?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. To fetch King Gersa to the feast.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Emperor on this marriage is so hot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pray Heaven it end not in apoplexy!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The very porters, as I pass’d the doors,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heard his loud laugh, and answer’d in full choir.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I marvel, Albert, you delay so long</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From these bright revelries; go, show yourself,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You may be made a duke.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Ay, very like:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pray, what day has his Highness fix’d upon?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. For what?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. The marriage. What else can I mean?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. To-day. O, I forgot, you could not know;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The news is scarce a minute old with me.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Married to day! To-day! You did not say so?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. Now, while I speak to you, their comely heads</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are bow’d before the mitre.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. O! monstrous!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. What is this?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Nothing, Sigifred. Farewell!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We’ll meet upon our subject. Farewell, count!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. Is this clear-headed Albert? He brain-turn’d!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis as portentous as a meteor.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit.</p>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-3-scene-2">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">An Apartment in the Castle</span></h5>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter as from the Marriage, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>, Nobles, Knights, Ladies, <abbr>etc.</abbr> Music.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Now Ludolph! Now Auranthe Daughter fair!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What can I find to grace your nuptial day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More than my love, and these wide realms in fee?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. I have too much.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. And I, my liege, by far.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Auranthe! I have! O, my bride, my love!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not all the gaze upon us can restrain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My eyes, too long poor exiles from thy face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From adoration, and my foolish tongue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From uttering soft responses to the love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I see in thy mute beauty beaming forth!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fair creature, bless me with a single word!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All mine!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Spare, spare me, my Lord; I swoon else.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Soft beauty! by to-morrow I should die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wert thou not mine.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[They talk apart.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Lady</b>. How deep she has bewitch’d him!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Knight</b>. Ask you for her recipe for love philtres.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Lady</b>. They hold the Emperor in admiration.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. If ever king was happy, that am I!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What are the cities ’yond the Alps to me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The provinces about the Danube’s mouth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The promise of fair sail beyond the Rhone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or routing out of Hyperborean hordes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To these fair children, stars of a new age?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unless perchance I might rejoice to win</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This little ball of earth, and chuck it them</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To play with!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Nay, my Lord, I do not know.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Let me not famish.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">to Conrad</span>)</b>. Good Franconia,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You heard what oath I sware, as the sun rose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That unless Heaven would send me back my son,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My Arab,⁠—no soft music should enrich</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The cool wine, kiss’d off with a soldier’s smack;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now all my empire, barter’d for one feast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seems poverty.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Upon the neighbour-plain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The heralds have prepared a royal lists;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your knights, found war-proof in the bloody field,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Speed to the game.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Well, Ludolph, what say you?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. My lord!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. A tourney?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Or, if ’t please you best⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. I want no more!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Lady</b>. He soars!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">2d Lady</b>. Past all reason.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Though heaven’s choir</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should in a vast circumference descend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sing for my delight, I’d stop my ears!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though bright Apollo’s car stood burning here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he put out an arm to bid me mount,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His touch an immortality, not I!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This earth, this palace, this room, Auranthe!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. This is a little painful; just too much.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conrad, if he flames longer in this wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I shall believe in wizard-woven loves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And old romances; but I’ll break the spell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ludolph!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. He’ll be calm, anon.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. You call’d!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yes, yes, yes, I offend. You must forgive me:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not being quite recover’d from the stun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of your large bounties. A tourney, is it not?</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[A senet heard faintly.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. The trumpets reach us.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">without</span>)</b>. On your peril, sirs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Detain us!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Voice (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">without</span>)</b>. Let not the abbot pass.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">2d Voice (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">without</span>)</b>. No,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On your lives!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Voice (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">without</span>)</b>. Holy father, you must not.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">without</span>)</b>. Otho!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Who calls on Otho?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">without</span>)</b>. Ethelbert!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Let him come in.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b> leading in <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i3">Thou cursed abbot, why</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hast brought pollution to our holy rites?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hast thou no fear of hangman, or the faggot?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. What portent⁠—what strange prodigy is this?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Away!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. You, Duke?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Albert has surely fail’d me!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look at the Emperor’s brow upon me bent!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. A sad delay!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Away, thou guilty thing!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. You again, Duke? Justice, most noble Otho!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You⁠—go to your sister there and plot again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A quick plot, swift as thought to save your heads;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For lo! the toils are spread around your den,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world is all agape to see dragg’d forth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two ugly monsters.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. What means he, my lord?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. I cannot guess.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Best ask your lady sister,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether the riddle puzzles her beyond</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The power of utterance.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Foul barbarian, cease;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Princess faints!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Stab him! O, sweetest wife!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Attendants bear off <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Alas!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Your wife!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Ay, Satan! does that yerk ye?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Wife! so soon!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Ay, wife! Oh, impudence!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou bitter mischief! Venomous bad priest!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How dar’st thou lift those beetle brows at me?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Me⁠—the prince Ludolph, in this presence here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon my marriage day, and scandalize</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My joys with such opprobrious surprise?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wife! Why dost linger on that syllable.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if it were some demon’s name pronounced</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To summon harmful lightning, and make yawn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sleepy thunder? Hast no sense of fear?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No ounce of man in thy mortality?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tremble! for, at my nod, the sharpen’d axe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will make thy bold tongue quiver to the roots,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those gray lids wink, and thou not know it, monk!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. O, poor deceived Prince! I pity thee! Great Otho!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I claim justice⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Thou shalt have ’t!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thine arms from forth a pulpit of hot fire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall sprawl distracted! O that that dull cowl</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were some most sensitive portion of thy life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I might give it to my hounds to tear!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy girdle some fine zealous-pained nerve</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To girth my saddle! And those devil’s beads</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each one a life, that I might, every day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crush one with Vulcan’s hammer!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Peace, my son;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You far outstrip my spleen in this affair.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let us be calm, and hear the abbot’s plea</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For this intrusion.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. I am silent, sire.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Conrad, see all depart not wanted here.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i> Knights, Ladies, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
					<p>
						<span>Ludolph, be calm. Ethelbert, peace awhile.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This mystery demands an audience</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of a just judge, and that will Otho be.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Why has he time to breathe another word?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Ludolph, old Ethelbert, be sure, comes not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To beard us for no cause; he’s not the man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To cry himself up an ambassador</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without credentials.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. I’ll chain up myself.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Old abbot, stand here forth. Lady Erminia,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sit. And now, abbot! what have you to say?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our ear is open. First we here denounce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hard penalties against thee, if ’t be found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The cause for which you have disturb’d us here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Making our bright hours muddy, be a thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of little moment.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. See this innocent?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Otho! thou father of the people call’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is her life nothing? Her fair honour nothing?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her tears from matins until even-song</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nothing? Her burst heart nothing? Emperor!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is this your gentle niece⁠—the simplest flower</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the world’s herbal⁠—this fair lily blanch’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still with the dews of piety, this meek lady</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here sitting like an angel newly-shent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who veils its snowy wings and grows all pale,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is she nothing?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. What more to the purpose, abbot</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Whither is he winding?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. No clue yet!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. You have heard, my Liege, and so, no doubt, all here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Foul, poisonous, malignant whisperings;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay open speech, rude mockery grown common,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against the spotless nature and clear fame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the princess Erminia, your niece.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I have intruded here thus suddenly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because I hold those base weeds, with tight hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which now disfigure her fair growing stem,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Waiting but for your sign to pull them up</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By the dark roots, and leave her palpable,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To all men’s sight, a lady innocent.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The ignominy of that whisper’d tale</span>
						<br/>
						<span>About a midnight gallant, seen to climb</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A window to her chamber neighbour’d near,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will from her turn off, and put the load</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On the right shoulders; on that wretch’s head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, by close stratagems, did save herself,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chiefly by shifting to this lady’s room</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A rope-ladder for false witness.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Most atrocious!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Ethelbert, proceed.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. With sad lips I shall:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, in the healing of one wound, I fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make a greater. His young highness here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To-day was married.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Good.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Would it were good!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet why do I delay to spread abroad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The names of those two vipers, from whose jaw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A deadly breath went forth to taint and blast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This guileless lady?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Abbot, speak their names.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. A minute first. It cannot be⁠—but may</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I ask, great judge, if you to-day have put</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A letter by unread?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Does ’t end in this?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Out with their names!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Bold sinner, say you so?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Out, hideous monk!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Confess, or by the wheel⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. My evidence cannot be far away;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, though it never come, be on my head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The crime of passing an attaint upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The slanderers of this virgin.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Speak aloud!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Auranthe, and her brother there.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Amaze!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Throw them from the windows!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Do what you will!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. What shall I do with them?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Something of quick dispatch, for should she hear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My soft Auranthe, her sweet mercy would</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prevail against my fury. Damned priest!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What swift death wilt thou die? As to the lady,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I touch her not.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Illustrious Otho, stay!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An ample store of misery thou hast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Choke not the granary of thy noble mind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With more bad bitter grain, too difficult</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A cud for the repentance of a man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gray-growing. To thee only I appeal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to thy noble son, whose yeasting youth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will clear itself, and crystal turn again.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A young man’s heart, by Heaven’s blessing, is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A wide world, where a thousand new-born hopes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Empurple fresh the melancholy blood:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But an old man’s is narrow, tenantless</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of hopes, and stuff’d with many memories,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, being pleasant, ease the heavy pulse⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Painful, clog up and stagnate. Weigh this matter</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Even as a miser balances his coin;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, in the name of mercy, give command</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That your knight Albert be brought here before you.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He will expound this riddle; he will show</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A noon-day proof of bad Auranthe’s guilt.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Let Albert straight be summon’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit one of the Nobles.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Impossible!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cannot doubt⁠—I will not⁠—no⁠—to doubt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is to be ashes!⁠—wither’d up to death!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. My gentle Ludolph, harbour not a fear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You do yourself much wrong.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. O, wretched dolt!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now, when my foot is almost on thy neck,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wilt thou infuriate me? Proof! Thou fool!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why wilt thou tease impossibility</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With such a thick-skull’d persevering suit?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fanatic obstinacy! Prodigy!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Monster of folly! Ghost of a turn’d brain!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You puzzle me,⁠—you haunt me,⁠—when I dream</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of you my brain will split! Bold sorcerer!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Juggler! May I come near you? On my soul</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I know not whether to pity, curse, or laugh.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>, and the Nobleman.</p>
					<p>
						<span>Here, Albert, this old phantom wants a proof!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Give him his proof! A camel’s load of proofs!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Albert, I speak to you as to a man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose words once utter’d pass like current gold;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore fit to calmly put a close</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To this brief tempest. Do you stand possess’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of any proof against the honourableness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Lady Auranthe, our new-spoused daughter?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. You chill me with astonishment. How’s this?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My liege, what proof should I have ’gainst a fame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Impossible of slur?</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b> rises.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. O wickedness!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Deluded monarch, ’tis a cruel lie.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Peace, rebel-priest!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Insult beyond credence!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Almost a dream!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. We have awaked from!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A foolish dream that from my brow hath wrung</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A wrathful dew. O folly! why did I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So act the lion with this silly gnat?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let them depart. Lady Erminia!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I ever grieved for you, as who did not?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But now you have, with such a brazen front,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So most maliciously, so madly striven</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To dazzle the soft moon, when tenderest clouds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should be unloop’d around to curtain her;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I leave you to the desert of the world</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Almost with pleasure. Let them be set free</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For me! I take no personal revenge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More than against a nightmare, which a man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forgets in the new dawn.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Still in extremes! No, they must not be loose.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Albert, I must suspect thee of a crime</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So fiendish⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Fear’st thou not my fury, monk?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conrad, be they in your safe custody</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till we determine some fit punishment.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is so mad a deed, I must reflect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And question them in private; for perhaps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By patient scrutiny, we may discover</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether they merit death, or should be placed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In care of the physicians.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b> and Nobles, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b> following.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. My guards, ho!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Albert, wilt thou follow there?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wilt thou creep dastardly behind his back,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And shrink away from a weak woman’s eye?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Turn, thou court-Janus! thou forgett’st thyself;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here is the duke, waiting with open arms.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Guards.</p>
					<p>
						<span>To thank thee; here congratulate each other;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wring hands: embrace; and swear how lucky ’twas</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I, by happy chance, hit the right man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all the world to trust in.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Trust! to me!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">aside</span>)</b>. He is the sole one in this mystery.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Well, I give up, and save my prayers for Heaven!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You, who could do this deed, would ne’er relent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though, at my words, the hollow prison-vaults</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would groan for pity.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Manacle them both!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. I know it⁠—it must be⁠—I see it all!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Albert, thou art the minion!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Ah! too plain⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Silence! Gag up their mouths! I cannot bear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More of this brawling. That the Emperor</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had placed you in some other custody!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bring them away.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i> all but <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Though my name perish from the book of honour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Almost before the recent ink is dry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And be no more remember’d after death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than any drummer’s in the muster-roll;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet shall I season high my sudden fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With triumph o’er that evil-witted duke!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He shall feel what it is to have the hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of a man drowning, on his hateful throat.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. What discord is at ferment in this house?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. We are without conjecture; not a soul</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We met could answer any certainty.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Young Ludolph, like a fiery arrow, shot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By us.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. The Emperor, with cross’d arms, in thought.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. In one room music, in another sadness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perplexity every where!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. A trifle more!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Follow; your presences will much avail</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To tune our jarred spirits. I’ll explain.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i>.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="otho-the-great-act-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
					<h4>Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></h4>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-4-scene-1">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">Auranthe’s Apartment</span></h5>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b> discovered.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Well, well, I know what ugly jeopardy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We are caged in; you need not pester that</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into my ears. Pr’ythee, let me be spared</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A foolish tongue, that I may bethink me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of remedies with some deliberation.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You cannot doubt but ’tis in Albert’s power</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To crush or save us?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. No, I cannot doubt.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He has, assure yourself, by some strange means,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My secret; which I ever hid from him,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Knowing his mawkish honesty.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Cursed slave!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Ay, I could almost curse him now myself.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wretched impediment! Evil genius!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A glue upon my wings, that cannot spread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When they should span the provinces! A snake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A scorpion, sprawling on the first gold step,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conducting to the throne, high canopied.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. You would not hear my counsel, when his life</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Might have been trodden out, all sure and hush’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now the dull animal forsooth must be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Intreated, managed! When can you contrive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The interview he demands?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. As speedily</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It must be done as my bribed woman can</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unseen conduct him to me; but I fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twill be impossible, while the broad day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Comes through the panes with persecuting glare.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Me thinks, if ’t now were night I could intrigue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With darkness, bring the stars to second me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And settle all this trouble.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Nonsense! Child!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>See him immediately; why not now?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Do you forget that even the senseless door-posts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are on the watch and gape through all the house?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How many whisperers there are about,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hungry for evidence to ruin me:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men I have spurn’d, and women I have taunted?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Besides, the foolish prince sends, minute whiles,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His pages⁠—so they tell me⁠—to inquire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After my health, intreating, if I please,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To see me.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Well, suppose this Albert here;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What is your power with him?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. He should be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My echo, my taught parrot! but I fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He will be cur enough to bark at me;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have his own say; read me some silly screed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Bout shame and pity.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. What will you do then?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. What I shall do, I know not; what I would</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cannot be done; for see, this chamber-floor</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will not yield to the pick-axe and the spade,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here is no quiet depth of hollow ground.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Sister, you have grown sensible and wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seconding, ere I speak it, what is now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I hope, resolved between us.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Say, what is ’t?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. You need not be his sexton too; a man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May carry that with him shall make him die</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Elsewhere,⁠—give that to him; pretend the while</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You will to-morrow succumb to his wishes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be what they may, and send him from the Castle</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On some fool’s errand: let his latest groan</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Frighten the wolves!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Alas! he must not die!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Would you were both hearsed up in stifling lead!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Detested⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Conrad, hold! I would not bear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The little thunder of your fretful tongue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tho’ I alone were taken in these toils,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And you could free me; but remember, sir,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You live alone in my security:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So keep your wits at work, for your own sake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not mine, and be more mannerly.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Thou wasp!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If my domains were emptied of these folk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I had thee to starve⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. O, marvellous!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, Conrad, now be gone; the Host is look’d for;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cringe to the Emperor, entertain the Lords,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, do ye mind, above all things, proclaim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My sickness, with a brother’s sadden’d eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Condoling with Prince Ludolph. In fit time</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Return to me.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. I leave you to your thoughts.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe (<i xml:lang="la">sola</i>)</b>. Down, down, proud temper! down, Auranthe’s pride!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why do I anger him when I should kneel?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conrad! Albert! help! help! What can I do?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O wretched woman! lost, wreck’d, swallow’d up,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Accursed, blasted! O, thou golden Crown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Orbing along the serene firmament</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of a wide empire, like a glowing moon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou, bright sceptre! lustrous in my eyes,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There⁠—as the fabled fair Hesperian tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bearing a fruit more precious! graceful thing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Delicate, godlike, magic! must I leave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thee to melt in the visionary air,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ere, by one grasp, this common hand is made</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Imperial? I do not know the time</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When I have wept for sorrow; but methinks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I could now sit upon the ground, and shed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tears, tears of misery! O, the heavy day!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How shall I bear my life till Albert comes?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ludolph! Erminia? Proofs! O happy day!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bring me some mourning weeds, that I may ’tire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Myself, as fits one wailing her own death:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cut off these curls, and brand this lily hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And throw these jewels from my loathing sight,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fetch me a missal, and a string of beads,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A cup of bitter’d water, and a crust,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will confess, O holy Abbot!⁠—How!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What is this? Auranthe! thou fool, dolt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whimpering idiot! up! up! and quell!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am safe! Coward! why am I in fear?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Albert! he cannot stickle, chew the cud</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In such a fine extreme,⁠—impossible!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who knocks?</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Goes to the door, listens, and opens it.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span>Albert, I have been waiting for you here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With such an aching heart, such swooning throbs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On my poor brain, such cruel⁠—cruel sorrow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I should claim your pity! Art not well?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Yes, lady, well.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. You look not so, alas!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But pale, as if you brought some heavy news.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. You know full well what makes me look so pale.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. No! Do I? Surely I am still to learn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some horror; all I know, this present, is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am near hustled to a dangerous gulf,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which you can save me from,⁠—and therefore safe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So trusting in thy love; that should not make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thee pale, my Albert.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. It doth make me freeze.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Why should it, love?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. You should not ask me that,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But make your own heart monitor, and save</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Me the great pain of telling. You must know.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Something has vext you, Albert. There are times</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When simplest things put on a sombre cast;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A melancholy mood will haunt a man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Until most easy matters take the shape</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of unachievable tasks; small rivulets</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then seem impassable.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Do not cheat yourself</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With hope that gloss of words, or suppliant action,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or tears, or ravings, or self-threaten’d death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can alter my resolve.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. You make me tremble;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not so much at your threats, as at your voice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Untuned, and harsh, and barren of all love.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. You suffocate me! Stop this devil’s parley,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And listen to me; know me once for all.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. I thought I did. Alas! I am deceived.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. No, you are not deceived. You took me for</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A man detesting all inhuman crime;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore kept from me your demon’s plot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against Erminia. Silent? Be so still;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For ever! Speak no more; but hear my words,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy fate. Your safety I have bought to-day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By blazoning a lie, which in the dawn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll expiate with truth.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. O cruel traitor!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. For I would not set eyes upon thy shame;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I would not see thee dragg’d to death by the hair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Penanced, and taunted on a scaffolding!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To-night, upon the skirts of the blind wood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That blackens northward of these horrid towers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I wait for you with horses. Choose your fate.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Farewell!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Albert, you jest; I’m sure you must.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You, an ambitious Soldier! I, a Queen,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One who could say,⁠—here, rule these Provinces!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Take tribute from those cities for thyself!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Empty these armouries, these treasuries,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Muster thy warlike thousands at a nod!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Go! Conquer Italy!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Auranthe, you have made</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The whole world chaff to me. Your doom is fix’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Out, villain! dastard!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Look there to the door!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who is it?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Conrad, traitor!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Let him in.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span>Do not affect amazement, hypocrite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At seeing me in this chamber.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Auranthe?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Talk not with eyes, but speak your curses out</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against me, who would sooner crush and grind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A brace of toads, than league with them t’ oppress</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An innocent lady, gull an Emperor,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More generous to me than autumn sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To ripening harvests.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. No more insult, sir!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Ay, clutch your scabbard; but, for prudence sake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Draw not the sword; ’twould make an uproar, Duke,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You would not hear the end of. At nightfall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your lady sister, if I guess aright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will leave this busy castle. You had best</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Take farewell too of worldly vanities.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Vassal!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. To-morrow, when the Emperor sends</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For loving Conrad, see you fawn on him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Good even!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. You’ll be seen!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. See the coast clear then.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">as he goes</span>)</b>. Remorseless Albert! Cruel, cruel wretch!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[She lets him out.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. So, we must lick the dust?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. I follow him.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. How? Where? The plan of your escape?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. He waits</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For me with horses by the forest-side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Northward.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Good, good! he dies. You go, say you?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Perforce.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Be speedy, darkness! Till that comes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Friends keep you company!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. And you! And you!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all men! Vanish!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Retires to an inner apartment.</p>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-4-scene-2">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">An Apartment in the Castle</span></h5>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b> and a Page.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Page</b>. Still very sick, my lord; but now I went,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Knowing my duty to so good a Prince;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there her women, in a mournful throng,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stood in the passage whispering; if any</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mov’d, ’twas with careful steps, and hush’d as death:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They bade me stop.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Good fellow, once again</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make soft inquiry; pr’ythee, be not stay’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By any hindrance, but with gentlest force</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Break through her weeping servants, till thou com’st</span>
						<br/>
						<span>E’en to her chamber door, and there, fair boy⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If with thy mother’s milk thou hast suck’d in</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Any divine eloquence⁠—woo her ears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With plaints for me, more tender than the voice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of dying Echo, echoed.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Page</b>. Kindest master!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To know thee sad thus, will unloose my tongue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In mournful syllables. Let but my words reach</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her ears, and she shall take them coupled with</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Moans from my heart, and sighs not counterfeit.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May I speed better!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit Page.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">solus</span>)</b>. Auranthe! My Life!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long have I loved thee, yet till now not loved:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Remembering, as I do, hard-hearted times</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When I had heard e’en of thy death perhaps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thoughtless, suffer’d thee to pass alone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into Elysium!⁠—now I follow thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A substance or a shadow, wheresoe’er</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou leadest me,⁠—whether thy white feet press,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With pleasant weight, the amorous-aching earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or thro’ the air thou pioneerest me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A shade! Yet sadly I predestinate!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O unbenignest Love, why wilt thou let</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Darkness steal out upon the sleepy world</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So wearily; as if night’s chariot-wheels</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were clogg’d in some thick cloud? O, changeful Love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let not her steeds with drowsy-footed pace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pass the high stars, before sweet embassage</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Comes from the pillow’d beauty of that fair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Completion of all delicate Nature’s wit!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pout her faint lips anew with rubious health;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, with thine infant fingers, lift the fringe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of her sick eyelids; that those eyes may glow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With wooing light upon me, ere the Morn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Peers with disrelish, gray, barren, and cold!</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b> and Courtiers.</p>
					<p>
						<span>Otho calls me his Lion⁠—should I blush</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be so tamed? so⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Do me the courtesy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gentlemen, to pass on.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Knight</b>. We are your servants.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i> Courtiers.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. It seems then, Sir, you have found out the man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You would confer with;⁠—me?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. If I break not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too much upon your thoughtful mood, I will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Claim a brief while your patience.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. For what cause</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Soe’er, I shall be honour’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. I not less.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. What may it be? No trifle can take place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of such deliberate prologue, serious ’haviour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, be it what it may, I cannot fail</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To listen with no common interest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though so new your presence is to me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I have a soldier’s friendship for your fame.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Please you explain.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. As thus:⁠—for, pardon me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cannot in plain terms grossly assault</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A noble nature; and would faintly sketch</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What your quick apprehension will fill up;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So finely I esteem you.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. I attend.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Your generous father, most illustrious Otho,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sits in the banquet-room among his chiefs;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His wine is bitter, for you are not there;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His eyes are fix’d still on the open doors,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ev’ry passer in he frowns upon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seeing no Ludolph comes.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. I do neglect⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. And for your absence may I guess the cause?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Stay there! No⁠—guess? More princely you must be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than to make guesses at me. ’Tis enough.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’m sorry I can hear no more.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. And I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As grieved to force it on you so abrupt;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet, one day, you must know a grief, whose sting</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will sharpen more the longer ’tis conceal’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Say it at once, Sir! dead⁠—dead⁠—is she dead?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Mine is a cruel task: she is not dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And would, for your sake, she were innocent⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Thou liest! Thou amazest me beyond</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All scope of thought, convulsest my heart’s blood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To deadly churning! Gersa, you are young,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As I am; let me observe you, face to face;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not gray-brow’d like the poisonous Ethelbert,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No rheumed eyes, no furrowing of age,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No wrinkles, where all vices nestle in</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like crannied vermin,⁠—no! but fresh and young,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hopeful featured. Ha! by Heaven you weep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tears, human tears! Do you repent you then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of a cursed torturer’s office? Why shouldst join⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tell me, the league of devils? Confess⁠—confess⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Lie!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Lie!⁠—but begone all ceremonious points</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of honour battailous! I could not turn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My wrath against thee for the orbed world.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Your wrath, weak boy? Tremble at mine, unless</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Retraction follow close upon the heels</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of that late stounding insult! Why has my sword</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not done already a sheer judgment on thee?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Despair, or eat thy words! Why, thou wast nigh</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whimpering away my reason! Hark ye, Sir,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is no secret, that Erminia,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Erminia, Sir, was hidden in your tent;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O bless’d asylum! Comfortable home!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Begone! I pity thee; thou art a gull,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Erminia’s last new puppet?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Furious fire!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou mak’st me boil as hot as thou canst flame!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in thy teeth I give thee back the lie!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou liest! Thou, Auranthe’s fool! A wittol⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Look! look at this bright sword:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is no part of it, to the very hilt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But shall indulge itself about thine heart!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Draw! but remember thou must cower thy plumes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As yesterday the Arab made thee stoop⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Patience! Not here; I would not spill thy blood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here, underneath this roof where Otho breathes,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy father,⁠—almost mine.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. O faltering coward!</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Page</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span>Stay, stay; here is one I have half a word with.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Well⁠—What ails thee, child?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Page</b>. My lord!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Good fellow!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Page</b>. They are fled!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. They! Who?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Page</b>. When anxiously</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I hasten’d back, your grieving messenger,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I found the stairs all dark, the lamps extinct,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And not a foot or whisper to be heard.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I thought her dead, and on the lowest step</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sat listening; when presently came by</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two muffled up,⁠—one sighing heavily,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The other cursing low, whose voice I knew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the Duke Conrad’s. Close I follow’d them</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thro’ the dark ways they chose to the open air;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, as I follow’d, heard my lady speak.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Thy life answers the truth!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Page</b>. The chamber’s empty!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. As I will be of mercy! So, at last,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This nail is in my temples!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Be calm in this.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. I am.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. And Albert too has disappear’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ere I met you, I sought him everywhere;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You would not hearken.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Which way went they, boy?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. I’ll hunt with you.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. No, no, no. My senses are</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still whole. I have survived. My arm is strong⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My appetite sharp⁠—for revenge! I’ll no sharer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In my feast; my injury is all my own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so is my revenge, my lawful chattels!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Terrier, ferret them out! Burn⁠—burn the witch!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Trace me their footsteps! Away!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i>.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="otho-the-great-act-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
					<h4>Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></h4>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-5-scene-1">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">A Part of the Forest</span></h5>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Go no further; not a step more. Thou art</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A master-plague in the midst of miseries.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Go⁠—I fear thee! I tremble every limb,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who never shook before. There’s moody death</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In thy resolved looks! Yes, I could kneel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To pray thee far away! Conrad, go! go!⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There! yonder underneath the boughs I see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our horses!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Ay, and the man.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Yes, he is there.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Go, go⁠—no blood! no blood!⁠—go, gentle Conrad!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. Farewell!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Farewell! For this Heaven pardon you!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Conrad</b>. If he survive one hour, then may I die</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In unimagined tortures, or breathe through</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A long life in the foulest sink o’ the world!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He dies! ’Tis well she do not advertise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The caitiff of the cold steel at his back.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b> and Page.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Miss’d the way, boy? Say not that on your peril!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Page</b>. Indeed, indeed I cannot trace them further.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Must I stop here? Here solitary die!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stifled beneath the thick oppressive shade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of these dull boughs,⁠—this oven of dark thickets,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Silent,⁠—without revenge?⁠—pshaw!⁠—bitter end,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A bitter death⁠—a suffocating death,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A gnawing⁠—silent⁠—deadly, quiet death!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Escaped?⁠—fled?⁠—vanish’d? melted into air?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She’s gone! I cannot clutch her! no revenge!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A muffled death, ensnared in horrid silence!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Suck’d to my grave amid a dreamy calm!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O, where is that illustrious noise of war,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To smother up this sound of labouring breath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This rustle of the trees!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b> shrieks at a distance.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Page</b>. My lord, a noise!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This way⁠—hark!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Yes, yes! A hope! A music!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A glorious clamour! How I live again!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i>.</p>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-5-scene-2">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">Another Part of the Forest</span></h5>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b> (wounded).</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. O! for enough life to support me on</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Otho’s feet!</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Thrice villanous, stay there!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tell me where that detested woman is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or this is through thee!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. My good Prince, with me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sword has done its worst; not without worst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Done to another,⁠—Conrad has it home⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I see you know it all⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Where is his sister?</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Albert!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Ha! There! there!⁠—He is the paramour!⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There⁠—hug him⁠—dying! O, thou innocence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shrine him and comfort him at his last gasp.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kiss down his eyelids! Was he not thy love?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wilt thou forsake him at his latest hour?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Keep fearful and aloof from his last gaze,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His most uneasy moments, when cold death</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stands with the door ajar to let him in?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. O that that door with hollow slam would close</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon me sudden, for I cannot meet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all the unknown chambers of the dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such horrors⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Auranthe! what can he mean?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What horrors! Is it not a joyous time?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Am I not married to a paragon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Of personal beauty and untainted soul?”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A blushing fair-eyed purity? A sylph,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose snowy timid hand has never sinn’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond a flower pluck’d, white as itself?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Albert, you do insult my bride⁠—your mistress⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To talk of horrors on our wedding-night!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Alas! poor Prince, I would you knew my heart!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis not so guilty⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Hear, he pleads not guilty!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You are not? or, if so, what matters it?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You have escaped me, free as the dusk air,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hid in the forest, safe from my revenge;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cannot catch you! You should laugh at me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Poor cheated Ludolph! Make the forest hiss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With jeers at me! You tremble; faint at once,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You will come to again. O cockatrice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I have you! Whither wander those fair eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To entice the Devil to your help, that he</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May change you to a spider, so to crawl</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into some cranny to escape my wrath?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b>. Sometimes the counsel of a dying man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth operate quietly when his breath is gone:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disjoin those hands⁠—part⁠—part⁠—do not destroy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each other⁠—forget her!⁠—Our miseries</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are equal shared, and mercy is⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. A boon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When one can compass it. Auranthe, try</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your oratory; your breath is not so hitch’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ay, stare for help!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albert</b> groans and dies.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i3">There goes a spotted soul</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Howling in vain along the hollow night!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hear him! He calls you⁠—sweet Auranthe, come!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b>. Kill me!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. No! What, upon our marriage-night!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The earth would shudder at so foul a deed!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A fair bride! A sweet bride! An innocent bride!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No! we must revel it, as ’tis in use</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In times of delicate brilliant ceremony:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come, let me lead you to our halls again!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay, linger not; make no resistance, sweet;⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will you? Ah, wretch, thou canst not, for I have</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The strength of twenty lions ’gainst a lamb!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now⁠—one adieu for Albert!⁠—Come away!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i>.</p>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-5-scene-3">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">An Inner Court in the Castle</span></h5>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theodore</b>, meeting.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Knight</b>. Was ever such a night?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. What horrors more?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Things unbelieved one hour, so strange they are,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The next hour stamps with credit.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Knight</b>. Your last news?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>. After the Page’s story of the death</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Albert and Duke Conrad?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. And the return</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Ludolph with the Princess.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>. No more, save</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prince Gersa’s freeing Abbot Ethelbert,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the sweet lady, fair Erminia,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From prison.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Knight</b>. Where are they now? Hast yet heard?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>. With the sad Emperor they are closeted;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I saw the three pass slowly up the stairs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The lady weeping, the old Abbot cowl’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. What next?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Knight</b>. I ache to think on’t.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>. ’Tis with fate.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Knight</b>. One while these proud towers are hush’d as death.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>. The next our poor Prince fills the arched rooms</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With ghastly ravings.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. I do fear his brain.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>. I will see more. Bear you so stout a heart?</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i> into the Castle.</p>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-5-scene-4">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">A Cabinet, Opening Towards a Terrace</span></h5>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>, and a Physician, discovered.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. O, my poor boy! My son! My son! My Ludolph!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have ye no comfort for me, ye physicians</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the weak body and soul?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. ’Tis not in medicine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Either of heaven or earth, to cure, unless</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fit time be chosen to administer.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. A kind forbearance, holy Abbot. Come,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Erminia; here, sit by me, gentle girl;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Give me thy hand; hast thou forgiven me?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Would I were with the saints to pray for you!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Why will ye keep me from my darling child?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Physician</b>. Forgive me, but he must not see thy face.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Is then a father’s countenance a Gorgon?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath it not comfort in it? Would it not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Console my poor boy, cheer him, help his spirits?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let me embrace him; let me speak to him;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will! Who hinders me? Who’s Emperor?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Physician</b>. You may not. Sire; ’twould overwhelm him quite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He is so full of grief and passionate wrath;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too heavy a sigh would kill him, or do worse.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He must be saved by fine contrivances;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, most especially, we must keep clear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of his sight a father whom he loves;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His heart is full, it can contain no more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And do its ruddy office.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Sage advice;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We must endeavour how to ease and slacken</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The tight-wound energies of his despair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not make them tenser.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Enough! I hear, I hear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet you were about to advise more,⁠—I listen.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. This learned doctor will agree with me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That not in the smallest point should he be thwarted,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or gainsaid by one word; his very motions,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nods, becks, and hints, should be obey’d with care,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Even on the moment: so his troubled mind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May cure itself.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Physician</b>. There are no other means.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Open the door; let’s hear if all is quiet.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Physician</b>. Beseech you, Sire, forbear.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Do, do.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. I command!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Open it straight;⁠—hush!⁠—quiet!⁠—my lost boy!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My miserable child!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">indistinctly without</span>)</b>. Fill, fill my goblet⁠—here’s a health!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. O, close the door!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Let, let me hear his voice; this cannot last:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fain would I catch up his dying words,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though my own knell they be! This cannot last!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O let me catch his voice⁠—for lo! I hear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This silence whisper me that he is dead!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is so! Gersa?</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Physician</b>. Say, how fares the prince?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. More calm; his features are less wild and flush’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Once he complained of weariness.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Physician</b>. Indeed!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis good⁠—’tis good; let him but fall asleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That saves him.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Gersa, watch him like a child;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ward him from harm,⁠—and bring me better news!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Physician</b>. Humour him to the height. I fear to go;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For should he catch a glimpse of my dull garb,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It might affright him, fill him with suspicion</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That we believe him sick, which must not be.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. I will invent what soothing means I can.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Physician</b>. This should cheer up your highness; weariness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is a good symptom, and most favourable;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It gives me pleasant hopes. Please you, walk forth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the terrace; the refreshing air</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will blow one half of your sad doubts away.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i>.</p>
					<h5 id="otho-the-great-act-5-scene-5">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">A Banqueting Hall, Brilliantly Illuminated, and Set Forth with All Costly Magnificence, with Supper-Tables Laden with Services of Gold and Silver. A Door in the Back Scene, Guarded by Two Soldiers. Lords, Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, Whispering Sadly, and Ranging Themselves; Part Entering and Part Discovered.</span></h5>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Knight</b>. Grievously are we tantalized, one and all;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sway’d here and there, commanded to and fro,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As though we were the shadows of a sleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And link’d to a dreaming fancy. What do we here?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>. I am no seer; you know we must obey</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The prince from A to Z, though it should be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To set the place in flames. I pray, hast heard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where the most wicked Princess is?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Knight</b>. There, sir,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the next room; have you remark’d those two</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stout soldiers posted at the door?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonfred</b>. For what?</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[They whisper.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Lady</b>. How ghast a train!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">2d Lady</b>. Sure this should be some splendid burial.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Lady</b>. What fearful whispering! See, see,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gersa there!</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Put on your brightest looks; smile if you can;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Behave as all were happy; keep your eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From the least watch upon him; if he speaks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To any one, answer collectedly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without surprise, his questions, howe’er strange.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do this to the utmost⁠—though, alas! with me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The remedy grows hopeless! Here he comes,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Observe what I have said⁠—show no surprise.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>, followed by <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b> and Page.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. A splendid company! rare beauties here!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I should have Orphean lips, and Plato’s fancy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amphion’s utterance, toned with his lyre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or the deep key of Jove’s sonorous mouth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To give fit salutation. Methought I heard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As I came in, some whispers⁠—what of that?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis natural men should whisper; at the kiss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Psyche given by Love, there was a buzz</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among the gods!⁠—and silence is as natural.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These draperies are fine, and, being a mortal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I should desire no better; yet, in truth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There must be some superior costliness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some wider-domed high magnificence!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I would have, as a mortal I may not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hangings of heaven’s clouds, purple and gold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Slung from the spheres; gauzes of silver mist,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Loop’d up with cords of twisted wreathed light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tassel’d round with weeping meteors!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These pendent lamps and chandeliers are bright</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As earthly fires from dull dross can be cleansed;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet could my eyes drink up intenser beams</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Undazzled⁠—this is darkness⁠—when I close</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These lids, I see far fiercer brilliances,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Skies full of splendid moons, and shooting stars,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And spouting exhalations, diamond fires,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And panting fountains quivering with deep glows!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yes⁠—this is dark⁠—is it not dark?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. My Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis late; the lights of festival are ever</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quench’d in the morn.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. ’Tis not to-morrow then?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. ’Tis early dawn.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Indeed full time we slept:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Say you so, Prince?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. I say I quarrel’d with you;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We did not tilt each other⁠—that’s a blessing,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Good gods! no innocent blood upon my head!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. Retire, Gersa!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. There should be three more here;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For two of them, they stay away perhaps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Being gloomy-minded, haters of fair revels,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They know their own thoughts best.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">As for the third,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deep blue eyes, semi-shaded in white lids,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Finish’d with lashes fine for more soft shade,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Completed by her twin-arch’d ebon-brows;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>White temples, of exactest elegance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of even mould, felicitous and smooth;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cheeks fashion’d tenderly on either side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So perfect, so divine, that our poor eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are dazzled with the sweet proportioning,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wonder that ’tis so⁠—the magic chance!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her nostrils, small, fragrant, fairy-delicate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her lips⁠—I swear no human bones e’er wore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So taking a disguise;⁠—you shall behold her!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We’ll have her presently; ay, you shall see her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wonder at her, friends, she is so fair;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She is the world’s chief jewel, and, by heaven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She’s mine by right of marriage!⁠—she is mine!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Patience, good people, in fit time I send</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A summoner,⁠—she will obey my call,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Being a wife most mild and dutiful.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First I would hear what music is prepared</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To herald and receive her; let me hear!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. Bid the musicians soothe him tenderly.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[A soft strain of Music.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Ye have none better? No, I am content;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis a rich sobbing melody, with reliefs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full and majestic; it is well enough,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And will be sweeter, when you see her pace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sweeping into this presence, glistened o’er</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With emptied caskets, and her train upheld</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By ladies, habited in robes of lawn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sprinkled with golden crescents, others bright</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In silks, with spangles shower’d, and bow’d to</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Duchesses and pearled Margravines!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sad, that the fairest creature of the earth⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I pray you mind me not⁠—’tis sad, I say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That the extremest beauty of the world</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should so entrench herself away from me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Behind a barrier of engender’d guilt!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">2d Lady</b>. Ah! what a moan!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Knight</b>. Most piteous indeed!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. She shall be brought before this company,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then⁠—then⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Lady</b>. He muses.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. O, Fortune, where will this end?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. I guess his purpose! Indeed he must not have</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That pestilence brought in,⁠—that cannot be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There we must stop him.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. I am lost! Hush, hush!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He is about to rave again.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. A barrier of guilt! I was the fool!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She was the cheater! Who’s the cheater now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And who the fool? The entrapp’d, the caged, fool,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bird-limed raven? She shall croak to death</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Secure! Methinks I have her in my fist,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To crush her with my heel! Wait, wait! I marvel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My father keeps away. Good friend⁠—ah! Sigifred!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do bring him to me,⁠—and Erminia</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I fain would see before I sleep⁠—and Ethelbert,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he may bless me, as I know he will,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though I have cursed him.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. Rather suffer me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To lead you to them.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. No, excuse me,⁠—no!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The day is not quite done. Go, bring them hither.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>.</p>
					<p>
						<span>Certes, a father’s smile should, like sun light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Slant on my sheafed harvest of ripe bliss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Besides, I thirst to pledge my lovely bride</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In a deep goblet: let me see⁠—what wine?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The strong Iberian juice, or mellow Greek?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or pale Calabrian? Or the Tuscan grape?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or of old Ætna’s pulpy wine-presses,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Black stain’d with the fat vintage, as it were</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The purple slaughter-house, where Bacchus’ self</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prick’d his own swollen veins? Where is my page?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Page</b>. Here, here!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Be ready to obey me; anon thou shalt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bear a soft message for me; for the hour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Draws near when I must make a winding up</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of bridal mysteries⁠—a fine-spun vengeance!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Carve it on my tomb, that, when I rest beneath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men shall confess this Prince was gull’d and cheated,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But from the ashes of disgrace he rose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More than a fiery phœnix, and did burn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His ignominy up in purging fires!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did I not send. Sir, but a moment past,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For my Father?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. You did.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Perhaps ’twould be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Much better he came not.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. He enters now!</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>, and Physician.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. O thou good man, against whose sacred head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I was a mad conspirator, chiefly too,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the sake of my fair newly wedded wife,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now to be punish’d, do not look so sad!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those charitable eyes will thaw my heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those tears will wash away a just resolve,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A verdict ten times sworn! Awake⁠—awake⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Put on a judge’s brow, and use a tongue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made iron-stern by habit! Thou shalt see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A deed to be applauded, ’scribed in gold!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Join a loud voice to mine, and so denounce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What I alone will execute.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Dear son.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What is it? By your father’s love, I sue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That it be nothing merciless!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. To that demon?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not so! No! She is in temple-stall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Being garnish’d for the sacrifice, and I,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Priest of Justice, will immolate her</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the altar of wrath. She stings me through!⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Even as the worm doth feed upon the nut,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So she, a scorpion, preys upon my brain!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I feel her gnawing here! Let her but vanish,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then, father, I will lead your legions forth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Compact in steeled squares, and speared files,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bid our trumpets speak a fell rebuke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To nations drows’d in peace!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. To-morrow, son,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be your word law; forget to-day⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. I will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When I have finish’d it. Now,⁠—now, I’m pight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tight-footed for the deed!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Alas! Alas!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. What angel’s voice is that? Erminia!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ah! gentlest creature, whose sweet innocence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was almost murder’d; I am penitent;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wilt thou forgive me? And thou, holy man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Good Ethelbert, shall I die in peace with you?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Erminia</b>. Die, my lord!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. I feel it possible.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Physician?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Physician</b>. I fear me he is past my skill.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Not so!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. I see it⁠—I see it⁠—I have been wandering!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Half mad⁠—not right here⁠—I forget my purpose.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bestir⁠—bestir⁠—Auranthe! Ha! ha! ha!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Youngster! Page! go bid them drag her to me!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Obey! This shall finish it!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Draws a dagger.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Oh, my son! my son!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. This must not be⁠—stop there!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Am I obey’d?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A little talk with her⁠—no harm⁠—haste! haste!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit Page.</p>
					<p>
						<span>Set her before me⁠—never fear I can strike.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Several Voices</b>. My Lord! My Lord!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Good Prince!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. Why do ye trouble me? out⁠—out⁠—away!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There she is! take that! and that! no, no⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That’s not well done.⁠—Where is she?</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The doors open. Enter Page. Several women are seen grouped ahout <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Auranthe</b> in the inner-room.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Page</b>. Alas! My Lord, my Lord! they cannot move her!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her arms are stiff,⁠—her fingers clench’d and cold!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. She’s dead!</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Staggers and falls into their arms.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ethelbert</b>. Take away the dagger.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. Softly; so!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Otho</b>. Thank God for that!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sigifred</b>. It could not harm him now.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gersa</b>. No!⁠—brief be his anguish!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ludolph</b>. She’s gone! I am content⁠—Nobles, good night!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We are all weary⁠—faint⁠—set ope the doors⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will to bed!⁠—To-morrow⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Dies.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The Curtain falls.</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="king-stephen" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem z3998:drama">
				<h3 epub:type="fulltitle">
					<span epub:type="title">King Stephen</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A Dramatic Fragment</span>
				</h3>
				<h4>Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h4>
				<h5 id="king-stephen-act-1-scene-1">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">Field of Battle</span></h5>
				<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarum. Enter King <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b>, Knights, and Soldiers.</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b>. If shame can on a soldier’s vein-swoll’n front</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spread deeper crimson than the battle’s toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blush in your casing helmets! for see, see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yonder my chivalry, my pride of war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrench’d with an iron hand from firm array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are routed loose about the plashy meads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of honour forfeit. O, that my known voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could reach your dastard ears, and fright you more!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fly, cowards, fly! Glocester is at your backs!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throw your slack bridles o’er the flurried manes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ply well the rowell with faint trembling heels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scampering to death at last!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Knight</b>. The enemy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bears his flaunt standard close upon their rear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">2d Knight</b>. Sure of a bloody prey, seeing the fens Will swamp them girth-deep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b>. Over head and ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No matter! ’Tis a gallant enemy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How like a comet he goes streaming on.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But we must plague him in the flank,⁠—hey, friends?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are well breathed,⁠—follow!</span>
				</p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Earl <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Baldwin</b> and Soldiers, as defeated.</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b>. De Redvers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is the monstrous bugbear that can fright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Baldwin?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Baldwin</b>. No scare-crow, but the fortunate star</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of boisterous Chester, whose fell truncheon now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Points level to the goal of victory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This way he comes, and if you would maintain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your person unaffronted by vile odds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take horse, my Lord.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b>. And which way spur for life?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I thank Heaven I am in the toils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That soldiers may bear witness how my arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can burst the meshes. Not the eagle more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loves to beat up against a tyrannous blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than I to meet the torrent of my foes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is a brag,⁠—be ’t so,⁠—but if I fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Carve it upon my ’scutcheon’d sepulchre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On, fellow soldiers! Earl of Redvers, back!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not twenty Earls of Chester shall brow-beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The diadem.</span>
				</p>
				<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i>. Alarum.</p>
				<h5 id="king-stephen-act-1-scene-2">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">Another Part of the Field</span></h5>
				<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trumpets sounding a Victory. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>, Knights, and Forces.</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>. Now may we lift our bruised visors up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take the flattering freshness of the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the wide din of battle dies away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into times past, yet to be echoed sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the silent pages of our chroniclers.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Knight</b>. Will Stephen’s death be mark’d there, my good Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that we gave him lodging in yon towers?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>. Fain would I know the great usurper’s fate.</span>
				</p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter two Captains severally.</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Captain</b>. My Lord!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">2d Captain</b>. Most noble Earl!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Captain</b>. The King⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">2d Captain</b>. The Empress greets⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>. What of the King?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Captain</b>. He sole and lone maintains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hopeless bustle ’mid our swarming arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a nimble savageness attacks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Escapes, makes fiercer onset, then anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eludes death, giving death to most that dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trespass within the circuit of his sword!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He must by this have fallen. Baldwin is taken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for the Duke of Bretagne, like a stag</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He flies, for the Welsh beagles to hunt down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God save the Empress!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>. Now our dreaded Queen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What message from her Highness?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">2d Captain</b>. Royal Maud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the throng’d towers of Lincoln hath look’d down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Pallas from the walls of Ilion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seen her enemies havock’d at her feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She greets most noble Glocester from her heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entreating him, his captains, and brave knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To grace a banquet. The high city gates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are envious which shall see your triumph pass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The streets are full of music.</span>
				</p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter 2d Knight.</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>. Whence come you?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">2d Knight</b>. From Stephen, my good Prince⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stephen! Stephen!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>. Why do you make such echoing of his name?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">2d Knight</b>. Because I think, my lord, he is no man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a fierce demon, ’nointed safe from wounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And misbaptized with a Christian name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>. A mighty soldier!⁠—Does he still hold out?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">2d Knight</b>. He shames our victory. His valour still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keeps elbow-room amid our eager swords,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And holds our bladed falchions all aloof⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His gleaming battle-axe being slaughter-sick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smote on the morion of a Flemish knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broke short in his hand; upon the which he flung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heft away with such a vengeful force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It paunch’d the Earl of Chester’s horse, who then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spleen-hearted came in full career at him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>. Did no one take him at a vantage then?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">2d Knight</b>. Three then with tiger leap upon him flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom with his sword swift-drawn and nimbly held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stung away again, and stood to breathe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiling. Anon upon him rush’d once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A throng of foes, and in this renew’d strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sword met his and snapp’d off at the hilt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>. Come, lead me to this man⁠—and let us move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In silence, not insulting his sad doom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With clamorous trumpets. To the Empress bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My salutation as befits the time.</span>
				</p>
				<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[<i xml:lang="la">Exeunt</i> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b> and Forces.</p>
				<h5 id="king-stephen-act-1-scene-3">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">The Field of Battle</span></h5>
				<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b> unarmed.</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b>. Another sword! And what if I could seize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One from Bellona’s gleaming armoury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or choose the fairest of her sheafed spears!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where are my enemies? Here, close at hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here come the testy brood. O, for a sword!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m faint⁠—a biting sword! A noble sword!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hedge-stake⁠—or a ponderous stone to hurl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With brawny vengeance, like the labourer Cain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come on! Farewell my kingdom, and all hail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou superb, plumed, and helmeted renown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All hail⁠—I would not truck this brilliant day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rule in Pylos with a Nestor’s beard⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come on!</span>
				</p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">De Kaims</b> and Knights, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">De Kaims</b>. Is ’t madness or a hunger after death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That makes thee thus unarm’d throw taunts at us?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yield, Stephen, or my sword’s point dips in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gloomy current of a traitor’s heart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b>. Do it, De Kaims, I will not budge an inch.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">De Kaims</b>. Yes, of thy madness thou shalt take the meed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b>. Darest thou?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">De Kaims</b>. How dare, against a man disarm’d?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b>. What weapons has the lion but himself?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come not near me, De Kaims, for by the price</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the glory I have won this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being a king, I will not yield alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To any but the second man of the realm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Robert of Glocester.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">De Kaims</b>. Thou shalt vail to me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b>. Shall I, when I have sworn against it, sir?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou think’st it brave to take a breathing king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, on a court-day bow’d to haughty Maud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The awed presence-chamber may be bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whisper, there’s the man who took alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stephen⁠—me⁠—prisoner. Certes, De Kaims,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ambition is a noble one.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">De Kaims</b>. ’Tis true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, Stephen, I must compass it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b>. No, no,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do not tempt me to throttle you on the gorge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or with my gauntlet crush your hollow breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just when your knighthood is grown ripe and full</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For lordship.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">A Soldier</b>. Is an honest yeoman’s spear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of no use at a need? Take that.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b>. Ah, dastard!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">De Kaims</b>. What, you are vulnerable! my prisoner!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephen</b>. No, not yet. I disclaim it, and demand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death as a sovereign right unto a king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who ’sdains to yield to any but his peer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If not in title, yet in noble deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Earl of Glocester. Stab to the hilt, De Kaims,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I will never by mean hands be led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From this so famous field. Do you hear! Be quick!</span>
				</p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trumpets. Enter the Earl of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chester</b>, and Knights.</p>
				<h5 id="king-stephen-act-1-scene-4">Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>.⁠—<span class="setting">A Presence Chamber. Queen <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Maud</b> in a Chair of State, the Earls <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chester</b>, Lords, Attendants</span></h5>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Maud</b>. Glocester, no more: I will behold that Boulogne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set him before me. Not for the poor sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of regal pomp and a vain-glorious hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou with wary speech, yet near enough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast hinted.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>. Faithful counsel have I given;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If wary, for your Highness’ benefit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Maud</b>. The heavens forbid that I should not think so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by thy valour have I won this realm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which by thy wisdom I will ever keep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sage advisers let me ever bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A meek attentive ear, so that they treat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the wide kingdom’s rule and government,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not trenching on our actions personal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Advised, not school’d, I would be; and henceforth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spoken to in clear, plain, and open terms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not side-ways sermon’d at.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>. Then in plain terms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once more for the fallen king⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Maud</b>. Your pardon. Brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would no more of that; for, as I said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not for worldly pomp I wish to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rebel, but as dooming judge to give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sentence something worthy of his guilt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>. If ’t must be so, I’ll bring him to your presence.</span>
				</p>
				<p class="inline-stage-direction" epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Glocester</b>.</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Maud</b>. A meaner summoner might do as well⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Lord of Chester, is ’t true what I hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Stephen of Boulogne, our prisoner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he, as a fit penance for his crimes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eats wholesome, sweet, and palatable food</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Off Glocester’s golden dishes⁠—drinks pure wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lodges soft?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chester</b>. More than that, my gracious Queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has anger’d me. The noble Earl, methinks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full soldier as he is, and without peer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In counsel, dreams too much among his books.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may read well, but sure ’tis out of date</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To play the Alexander with Darius.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Maud</b>. Truth! I think so. By Heavens it shall not last!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chester</b>. It would amaze your Highness now to mark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How Glocester overstrains his courtesy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that crime-loving rebel, that Boulogne⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Maud</b>. That ingrate!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chester</b>. For whose vast ingratitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To our late sovereign lord, your noble sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The generous Earl condoles in his mishaps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a sort of lackeying friendliness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Talks off the mighty frowning from his brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woos him to hold a duet in a smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if it please him, play an hour at chess⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Maud</b>. A perjured slave!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chester</b>. And for his perjury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glocester has fit rewards⁠—nay, I believe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sets his bustling household’s wits at work</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For flatteries to ease this Stephen’s hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make a heaven of his purgatory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adorning bondage with the pleasant gloss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of feasts and music, and all idle shows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of indoor pageantry; while siren whispers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Predestined for his ear, ’scape as half-check’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From lips the courtliest and the rubiest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the realm, admiring of his deeds.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Maud</b>. A frost upon his summer!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chester</b>. A queen’s nod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can make his June December. Here he comes.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
