<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Early Poems</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="early-poems" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Early Poems</h2>
			<article id="imitation-of-spenser" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Imitation of Spenser</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Now Morning from her orient chamber came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her first footsteps touch’d a verdant hill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crowning its lawny crest with amber flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silv’ring the untainted gushes of its rill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, pure from mossy beds, did down distil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after parting beds of simple flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By many streams a little lake did fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which round its marge reflected woven bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in its middle space, a sky that never lowers.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">There the kingfisher saw his plumage bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vying with fish of brilliant dye below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose silken fins, and golden scales’ light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cast upward, through the waves, a ruby glow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There saw the swan his neck of arched snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And oar’d himself along with majesty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sparkled his jetty eyes; his feet did show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the waves like Afric’s ebony.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on his back a fay reclined voluptuously.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-2"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Ah! could I tell the wonders of an isle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in that fairest lake had placed been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I could e’en Dido of her grief beguile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or rob from aged Lear his bitter teen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sure so fair a place was never seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all that ever charm’d romantic eye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seem’d an emerald in the silver sheen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the bright waters; or as when on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through clouds of fleecy white, laughs the coerulean sky.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And all around it dipp’d luxuriously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slopings of verdure through the glossy tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, as it were in gentle amity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rippled delighted up the flowery side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if to glean the ruddy tears, it tried.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fell profusely from the rose-tree stem!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Haply it was the workings of its pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In strife to throw upon the shore a gem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outvying all the buds in Flora’s diadem.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="on-death" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On Death</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Can death be sleep, when life is but a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scenes of bliss pass as a phantom by?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The transient pleasures as a vision seem.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet we think the greatest pain’s to die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How strange it is that man on earth should roam.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lead a life of woe, but not forsake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His rugged path; nor dare he view alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His future doom, which is but to awake.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-chatterton" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To Chatterton</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O Chatteeton! how very sad thy fate!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dear child of sorrow⁠—son of misery!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How soon the film of death obscur’d that eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence Genius mildly flash’d, and high debate.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-3"/>
					<span>How soon that voice, majestic and elate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Melted in dying numbers! Oh! how nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was night to thy fair morning. Thou didst die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A half-blown flow’ret which cold blasts amate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this is past: thou art among the stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of highest Heaven: to the rolling spheres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou sweetly singest: nought thy hymning mars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the ingrate world and human fears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On earth the good man base detraction bars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thy fair name, and waters it with tears.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-byron" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To Byron</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Byron! how sweetly sad thy melody!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attuning still the soul to tenderness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if soft Pity, with unusual stress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had touch’d her plaintive lute, and thou, being by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hadst caught the tones, nor suffer’d them to die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’ershadowing sorrow doth not make thee less</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Delightful: thou thy griefs dost dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a bright halo, shining beamily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when a cloud the golden moon doth veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its sides are ting’d with a resplendent glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the dark robe oft amber rays prevail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And like fair veins in sable marble flow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still warble, dying swan! still tell the tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The enchanting tale, the tale of pleasing woe.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="woman-when-i-behold-thee-flippant-vain" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">“Woman! When I Behold Thee Flippant, Vain”</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Woman! when I behold thee flippant, vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inconstant, childish, proud, and full of fancies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without that modest softening that enhances</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The downcast eye, repentant of the pain</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-4"/>
					<span>That its mild light creates to heal again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E’en then, elate, my spirit leaps, and prances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E’en then my soul with exultation dances</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that to love, so long, I’ve dormant lain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when I see thee meek, and kind, and tender,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heavens! how desperately do I adore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy winning graces;⁠—to be thy defender</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I hotly burn⁠—to be a Calidore⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A very Red Cross Knight⁠—a stout Leander⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might I be lov’d by thee like these of yore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Light feet, dark violet eyes, and parted hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soft dimpled hands, white neck, and creamy breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are things on which the dazzled senses rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the fond, fixèd eyes forget they stare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From such fine pictures, Heavens! I cannot dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To turn my admiration, though unpossess’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They be of what is worthy,⁠—though not drest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In lovely modesty, and virtues rare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet these I leave as thoughtless as a lark;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These lures I straight forget⁠—e’en ere I dine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or thrice my palate moisten: but when I mark</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such charms with mild intelligences shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My ear is open like a greedy shark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To catch the tunings of a voice divine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! who can e’er forget so fair a being?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who can forget her half-retiring sweets?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God! she is like a milk-white lamb that bleats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For man’s protection. Surely the All-seeing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who joys to see us with his gifts agreeing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will never give him pinions, who intreats</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such innocence to ruin,⁠—who vilely cheats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dove-like bosom. In truth there is no freeing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One’s thoughts from such a beauty; when I hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lay that once I saw her hand awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-5"/>
					<span>Her form seems floating palpable, and near:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had I e’er seen her from an arbour take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dewy flower, oft would that hand appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And o’er my eyes the trembling moisture shake.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-some-ladies" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To Some Ladies</h3>
				<p>
					<span>What though, while the wonders of nature exploring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I cannot your light, mazy footsteps attend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor listen to accents, that almost adoring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bless Cynthia’s face, the enthusiast’s friend:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet over the steep, whence the mountain-stream rushes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With you, kindest friends, in idea I rove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark the clear tumbling crystal, its passionate gushes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its spray that the wild flower kindly bedews.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Why linger you so, the wild labyrinth strolling?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why breathless, unable your bliss to declare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! you list to the nightingale’s tender condoling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Responsive to sylphs, in the moon-beamy air.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’T is morn, and the flowers with dew are yet drooping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I see you are treading the verge of the sea:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now! ah, I see it⁠—you just now are stooping</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pick up the keepsake intended for me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If a cherub, on pinions of silver descending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had brought me a gem from the fretwork of heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And smiles, with his star-cheering voice sweetly blending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blessings of Tighe had melodiously given;</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-6"/>
				<p>
					<span>It had not created a warmer emotion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than the present, fair nymphs, I was blest with from you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the shell, from the bright golden sands of the ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the emerald waves at your feet gladly threw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For, indeed, ’t is a sweet and peculiar pleasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(And blissful is he who such happiness finds,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To possess but a span of the hour of leisure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In elegant, pure, and aerial minds.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="on-receiving-a-curious-shell-and-a-copy-of-verses-from-the-same-ladies" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On Receiving a Curious Shell and a Copy of Verses from the Same Ladies</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Hast thou from the caves of Golconda, a gem</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pure as the ice-drop that froze on the mountain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright as the humming-bird’s green diadem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When it flutters in sunbeams that shine through a fountain?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hast thou a goblet for dark sparkling wine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That goblet right heavy, and massy, and gold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And splendidly mark’d with the story divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Armida the fair, and Rinaldo the bold?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hast thou a steed with a mane richly flowing?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast thou a sword that thine enemy’s smart is?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou a trumpet rich melodies blowing?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wear’st thou the shield of the fam’d Britomartis?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What is it that hangs from thy shoulder, so brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embroidered with many a spring peering flower?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it a scarf that thy fair lady gave?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hastest thou now to that fair lady’s bower?</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-7"/>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! courteous Sir Knight, with large joy thou art crown’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many the glories that brighten thy youth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will tell thee my blisses, which richly abound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In magical powers to bless, and to soothe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On this scroll thou seest written in characters fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sun-beamy tale of a wreath, and a chain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, warrior, it nurtures the property rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of charming my mind from the trammels of pain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This canopy mark: ’t is the work of a fay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath its rich shade did King Oberon languish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When lovely Titania was far, far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cruelly left him to sorrow, and anguish.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There, oft would he bring from his soft-sighing lute</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wild strains to which, spell-bound, the nightingales listen’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wondering spirits of heaven were mute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tears ’mong the dewdrops of morning oft glistened.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In this little dome, all those melodies strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soft, plaintive, and melting, for ever will sigh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor e’er will the notes from their tenderness change;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor e’er will the music of Oberon die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, when I am in a voluptuous vein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I pillow my head on the sweets of the rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And list to the tale of the wreath, and the chain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till its echoes depart; then I sink to repose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Adieu, valiant Eric! with joy thou art crown’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full many the glories that brighten thy youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I too have my blisses, which richly abound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In magical powers, to bless and to soothe.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-8"/>
			</article>
			<article id="written-on-the-day-that-mr-leigh-hunt-left-prison" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Written on the Day That <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leigh Hunt Left Prison</h3>
				<p>
					<span>What though, for showing truth to flatter’d state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kind Hunt was shut in prison, yet has he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his immortal spirit, been as free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the sky-searching lark, and as elate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Minion of grandeur! think you he did wait?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think you he nought hut prison-walls did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, so unwilling, thou unturn’dst the key?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, no! far happier, nobler was his fate!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Spenser’s halls he strayed, and bowers fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Culling enchanted flowers; and he flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With daring Milton through the fields of air:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To regions of his own his genius true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took happy flights. Who shall his fame impair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When thou art dead, and all thy wretched crew?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-hope" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To Hope</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When by my solitary hearth I sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hateful thoughts enwrap my soul in gloom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When no fair dreams before my “mind’s eye” flit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the bare heath of life presents no bloom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sweet Hope, ethereal balm upon me shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And wave thy silver pinions o’er my head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whene’er I wander, at the fall of night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where woven boughs shut out the moon’s bright ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should sad Despondency my musings fright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And frown, to drive fair Cheerfulness away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Peep with the moonbeams through the leafy roof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And keep that fiend Despondence far aloof.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-9"/>
				<p>
					<span>Should Disappointment, parent of Despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strive for her son to seize my careless heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, like a cloud, he sits upon the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Preparing on his spell-bound prey to dart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Chase him away, sweet Hope, with visage bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And fright him as the morning frightens night!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whene’er the fate of those I hold most dear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tells to my fearful breast a tale of sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O bright-eyed Hope, my morbid fancy cheer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let me awhile thy sweetest comforts borrow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thy heaven-born radiance around me shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And wave thy silver pinions o’er my head!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Should e’er unhappy love my bosom pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From cruel parents, or relentless fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me think it is not quite in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sigh out sonnets to the midnight air!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sweet Hope, ethereal balm upon me shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And wave thy silver pinions o’er my head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In the long vista of the years to roll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let me not see our country’s honour fade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me see our land retain her soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her pride, her freedom; and not freedom’s shade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From thy bright eyes unusual brightness shed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Beneath thy pinions canopy my head!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let me not see the patriot’s high bequest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Liberty! how great in plain attire!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the base purple of a court oppress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bowing her head, and ready to expire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But let me see thee stoop from heaven on wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That fill the skies with silver glitterings!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And as, in sparkling majesty, a star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gilds the bright summit of some gloomy cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brightening the half-veil’d face of heaven afar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, when dark thoughts my boding spirit shroud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sweet Hope, celestial influence round me shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Waving thy silver pinions o’er my head.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<div class="newpage" id="page-10"/>
			<article id="ode-to-apollo" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ode to Apollo</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">In thy western halls of gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When thou sittest in thy state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bards, that erst sublimely told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Heroic deeds, and sang of fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fervour seize their adamantine lyres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose chords are solid rays, and twinkle radiant fires.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Here Homer with his nervous arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Strikes the twanging harp of war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And even the western splendor warms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">While the trumpets sound afar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, what creates the most intense surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soul looks out through renovated eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Then, through thy Temple wide, melodious swells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The sweet majestic tone of Maro’s lyre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The soul delighted on each accent dwells,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Enraptur’d dwells,⁠—not daring to respire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The while he tells of grief around a funeral pyre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">’T is awful silence then again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Expectant stand the spheres;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Breathless the laurell’d peers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor move, till ends the lofty strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor move till Milton’s tuneful thunders cease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leave once more the ravish’d heavens in peace.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-11"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thou biddest Shakspeare wave his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And quickly forward spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Passions⁠—a terrific band⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And each vibrates the string</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with its tyrant temper best accords,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While from their Master’s lips pour forth the inspiring words.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">A silver trumpet Spenser blows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And, as its martial notes to silence flee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From a virgin chorus flows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A hymn in praise of spotless Chastity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’T is still! Wild warblings from the Æolian lyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enchantment softly breathe, and tremblingly expire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Next thy Tasso’s ardent numbers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Float along the pleasèd air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Calling youth from idle slumbers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Rousing them from Pleasure’s lair:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then o’er the strings his fingers gently move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And melt the soul to pity and to love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But when <em>Thou</em> joinest with the Nine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the powers of song combine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We listen here on earth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dying tones that fill the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And charm the ear of evening fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thee, Great God of Bards, receive their heavenly birth.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="hymn-to-apollo" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Hymn to Apollo</h3>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-12"/>
				<p>
					<span>God of the golden bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the golden lyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the golden hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of the golden fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Charioteer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of the patient year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where⁠—where slept thine ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When like a blank idiot I put on thy wreath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thy laurel, thy glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The light of thy story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or was I a worm⁠—too low crawling, for death?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">O Delphic Apollo!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Thunderer grasp’d and grasp’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Thunderer frown’d and frown’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eagle’s feathery mane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For wrath became stiffen’d⁠—the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of breeding thunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Went drowsily under,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Muttering to be unbound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O why didst thou pity, and for a worm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why touch thy soft lute</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Till the thunder was mute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why was not I crush’d⁠—such a pitiful germ?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">O Delphic Apollo!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Pleiades were up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Watching the silent air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seeds and roots in the Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were swelling for summer fare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Ocean, its neighbour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Was at its old labour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When, who⁠—who did dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tie, like a madman, thy plant round his brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And grin and look proudly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And blaspheme so loudly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And live for that honour, to stoop to thee now?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">O Delphic Apollo?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-a-young-lady-who-sent-me-a-laurel-crown" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To a Young Lady Who Sent Me a Laurel Crown</h3>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-13"/>
				<p>
					<span>Fresh morning gusts have blown away all fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From my glad bosom,⁠—now from gloominess</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I mount for ever⁠—not an atom less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the proud laurel shall content my bier.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No! by the eternal stars! or why sit here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the Sun’s eye, and ’gainst my temples press</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Apollo’s very leaves, woven to bless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thy white fingers and thy spirit clear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! who dares say, “Do this?” Who dares call down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My will from its high purpose? Who say, “Stand,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or “Go?” This mighty moment I would frown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On abject Cæsars⁠—not the stoutest band</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mailèd heroes should tear off my crown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet would I kneel and kiss thy gentle hand!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How many bards gild the lapses of time!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A few of them have ever been the food</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my delighted fancy,⁠—I could brood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over their beauties, earthly, or sublime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often, when I sit me down to rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These will in throngs before my mind intrude:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But no confusion, no disturbance rude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do they occasion; ’t is a pleasing chime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So the unnumber’d sounds that evening store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The songs of birds⁠—the whisp’ring of the leaves⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The voice of waters⁠—the great bell that heaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With solemn sound,⁠—and thousand others more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That distance of recognizance bereaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make pleasing music, and not wild uproar.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-14"/>
				<p>
					<span>Keen, fitful gusts are whisp’ring here and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the bushes half leafless, and dry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stars look very cold about the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I have many miles on foot to fare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet feel I little of the cool bleak air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or of the dead leaves rustling drearily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or of those silver lamps that burn on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or of the distance from home’s pleasant lair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I am brimful of the friendliness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in a little cottage I have found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fair-hair’d Milton’s eloquent distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his love for gentle Lycid drown’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of lovely Laura in her light green dress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faithful Petrarch gloriously crown’d.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="spenserian-stanza" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Spenserian Stanza</h3>
				<p class="TODO">WRITTEN AT THE CLOSE OF CANTO <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. BOOK <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. OF “THE FAERIE QUEENE”</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">In after-time, a sage of mickle lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yclep’d Typographus, the Giant took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And did refit his limbs as heretofore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made him read in many a learned book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And into many a lively legend look;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thereby in goodly themes so training him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all his brutishness he quite forsook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When, meeting Artegall and Talus grim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one he struck stone-blind, the other’s eyes wox dim.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="on-leaving-some-friends-at-an-early-hour" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On Leaving Some Friends at an Early Hour</h3>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-15"/>
				<p>
					<span>Give me a golden pen, and let me lean</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On heap’d-up flowers, in regions clear and far;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bring me a tablet whiter than a star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hand of hymning angel, when ’t is seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silver strings of heavenly harp atween:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let there glide by many a pearly car,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pink robes, and wavy hair, and diamond jar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And half-discover’d wings, and glances keen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The while let music wander round my ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as it reaches each delicious ending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Let me write down a line of glorious tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of many wonders of the spheres:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For what a height my spirit is contending!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’T is not content so soon to be alone.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="on-first-looking-into-chapmans-homer" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On First Looking Into Chapman’s Homer</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Much have I travell’d in the realms of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many goodly states and kingdoms seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Round many western islands have I been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which bards in fealty to Apollo hold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft of one wide expanse had I been told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That deep-brow’d Homer ruled as his demesne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet did I never breathe its pure serene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then felt I like some watcher of the skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When a new planet swims into his ken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He star’d at the Pacific⁠—and all his men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look’d at each other with a wild surmise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Silent, upon a peak in Darien.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="epistle-to-george-felton-mathew" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Epistle to George Felton Mathew</h3>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-16"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Sweet are the pleasures that to verse belong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doubly sweet a brotherhood in song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor can remembrance, Mathew! bring to view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fate more pleasing, a delight more true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than that in which the brother Poets joy’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, with combined powers, their wit employ’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To raise a trophy to the drama’s muses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thought of this great partnership diffuses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the genius-loving heart, a feeling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all that’s high, and great, and good, and healing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Too partial friend! fain would I follow thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past each horizon of fine poesy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fain would I echo back each pleasant note</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As o’er Sicilian seas, clear anthems float</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mong the light skimming gondolas far parted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just when the sun his farewell beam has darted:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ’t is impossible; far different cares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beckon me sternly from soft “Lydian airs,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hold my faculties so long in thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I am oft in doubt whether at all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall again see Phœbus in the morning:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or flush’d Aurora in the roseate dawning!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a white Naiad in a rippling stream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a rapt seraph in a moonlight beam;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or again witness what with thee I’ve seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dew by fairy feet swept from the green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After a night of some quaint jubilee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which every elf and fay had come to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When bright processions took their airy march</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the curvèd moon’s triumphal arch.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-17"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But might I now each passing moment give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the coy Muse, with me she would not live</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this dark city, nor would condescend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid contradictions her delights to lend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should e’er the fine-eyed maid to me be kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! surely it must be whene’er I find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some flowery spot, sequester’d, wild, romantic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That often must have seen a poet frantic;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where oaks, that erst the Druid knew, are growing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flowers, the glory of one day, are blowing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the dark-leav’d laburnum’s drooping clusters</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reflect athwart the stream their yellow lustres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And intertwined the cassia’s arms unite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its own drooping buds, but very white.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where on one side are covert branches hung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mong which the nightingales have always sung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In leafy quiet: where to pry, aloof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Atween the pillars of the sylvan roof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would be to find where violet beds were nestling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where the bee with cowslip bells was wrestling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There must be too a ruin dark and gloomy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say “Joy not too much in all that’s bloomy.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Yet this is vain⁠—O Mathew, lend thy aid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find a place where I may greet the maid⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where we may soft humanity put on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sit, and rhyme and think on Chatterton;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that warm-hearted Shakspeare sent to meet him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Four laurell’d spirits, heavenward to entreat him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With reverence would we speak of all the sages</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who have left streaks of light athwart their ages:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shouldst moralize on Milton’s blindness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mourn the fearful dearth of human kindness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To those who strove with the bright golden wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of genius, to flap away each sting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrown by the pitiless world. We next could tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those who in the cause of freedom fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of our own Alfred, of Helvetian Tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of him whose name to ev’ry heart’s a solace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High-minded and unbending William Wallace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While to the rugged north our musing turns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We well might drop a tear for him, and Burns.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-18"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Felton! without incitements such as these.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How vain for me the niggard Muse to tease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thee, she will thy every dwelling grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make “a sunshine in a shady place:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou wast once a flow’ret blooming wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close to the source, bright, pure, and undefil’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence gush the streams of song: In happy hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came chaste Diana from her shady bower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as the sun was from the east uprising;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as for him some gift she was devising,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beheld thee, pluck’d thee, cast thee in the stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet her glorious brother’s greeting beam.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I marvel much that thou hast never told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How, from a flower, into a fish of gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo chang’d thee: how thou next didst seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A black-ey’d swan upon the widening stream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when thou first didst in that mirror trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The placid features of a human face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou hast never told thy travels strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the wonders of the mazy range</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er pebbly crystal, and o’er golden sands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kissing thy daily food from Naiads’ pearly hands.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To ⸻</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Hadst thou liv’d in days of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O what wonders had been told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy lively countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy humid eyes that dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the midst of their own brightness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the very fane of lightness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over which thine eyebrows, leaning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Picture out each lovely meaning:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a dainty bend they lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to streaks across the sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the feathers from a crow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fallen on a bed of snow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy dark hair, that extends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into many graceful bends:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the leaves of Hellebore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn to whence they sprung before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And behind each ample curl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peeps the richness of a pearl.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-19"/>
				<p>
					<span>Downward too flows many a tress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a glossy waviness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full, and round like globes that rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the censer to the skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through sunny air. Add, too, the sweetness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy honied voice; the neatness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thine ankle lightly turn’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With those beauties scarce discern’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept with such sweet privacy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they seldom meet the eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the little loves that fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round about with eager pry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saving when, with freshening lave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou dipp’st them in the taintless wave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like twin water-lilies, born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the coolness of the morn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, if thou hadst breathèd then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now the Muses had been ten.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Couldst thou wish for lineage higher</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than twin-sister of Thalia?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At least for ever, evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will I call the Graces four.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hadst thou liv’d when chivalry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifted up her lance on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me what thou wouldst have been?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! I see the silver sheen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy broider’d, floating vest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cov’ring half thine ivory breast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, O heavens! I should see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that cruel destiny</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has plac’d a golden cuirass there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keeping secret what is fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like sunbeams in a cloudlet nested</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy locks in knightly casque are rested:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er which bend four milky plumes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the gentle lily’s blooms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Springing from a costly vase.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-20"/>
				<p>
					<span>See with what a stately pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes thine alabaster steed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Servant of heroic deed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er his loins his trappings glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the northern lights on snow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mount his back! thy sword unsheath!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sign of the enchanter’s death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bane of every wicked spell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silencer of dragon’s yell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! thou this wilt never do:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art an enchantress too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wilt surely never spill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blood of those whose eyes can kill.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>As from the darkening gloom a silver dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upsoars, and darts into the eastern light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On pinions that nought moves but pure delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fled thy soul into the realms above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Regions of peace and everlasting love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where happy spirits, crown’d with circlets bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of starry beam, and gloriously bedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taste the high joy none but the blest can prove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There thou or joinest the immortal quire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In melodies that even heaven fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill with superior bliss, or, at desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the omnipotent Father, cleav’st the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On holy message sent⁠—What pleasure ’s higher?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherefore does any grief our joy impair?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-to-solitude" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<div class="newpage" id="page-21"/>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet to Solitude</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O Solitude! if I must with thee dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let it not be among the jumbled heap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of murky buildings; climb with me the steep,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature’s observatory,⁠—whence the dell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its flowery slopes, its river’s crystal swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May seem a span; let me thy vigils keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Mongst boughs pavilion’d, where the deer’s swift leap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Startles the wild bee from the foxglove bell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though I’ll gladly trace these scenes with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet the sweet converse of an innocent mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose words are images of thoughts refin’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is my soul’s pleasure; and it sure must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Almost the highest bliss of human-kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When to thy haunts two kindred spirits flee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>To one who has been long in city pent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’T is very sweet to look into the fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And open face of heaven,⁠—to breathe a prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full in the smile of the blue firmament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who is more happy, when, with hearts content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fatigued he sinks into some pleasant lair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wavy grass, and reads a debonair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gentle tale of love and languishment?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Returning home at evening, with an ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Catching the notes of Philomel,⁠—an eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watching the sailing cloudlet’s bright career,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He mourns that day so soon has glided by:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en like the passage of an angel’s tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That falls through the clear ether silently.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-a-friend-who-sent-me-some-roses" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To a Friend Who Sent Me Some Roses</h3>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-22"/>
				<p>
					<span>As late I rambled in the happy fields,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What time the skylark shakes the tremulous dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his lush clover covert; when anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adventurous knights take up their dinted shields:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw the sweetest flower wild nature yields,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fresh-blown musk-rose; ’twas the first that threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its sweets upon the summer: graceful it grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is the wand that Queen Titania wields.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as I feasted on its fragrancy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I thought the garden-rose it far excell’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when, O Wells! thy roses came to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My sense with their deliciousness was spell’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft voices had they, that with tender plea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whisper’d of peace, and truth, and friendliness unquell’d.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! how I love, on a fair summer’s eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When streams of light pour down the golden west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the balmy zephyrs tranquil rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silver clouds, far⁠—far away to leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All meaner thoughts, and take a sweet reprieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From little cares; to find, with easy quest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fragrant wild, with Nature’s beauty drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there into delight my soul deceive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There warm my breast with patriotic lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Musing on Milton’s fate⁠—on Sydney’s bier⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till their stern forms before my mind arise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps on wings of Poesy upsoar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full often dropping a delicious tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When some melodious sorrow spells mine eyes.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="i-stood-tiptoe-upon-a-little-hill" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">“I Stood Tiptoe Upon a Little Hill”</h3>
				<blockquote class="TODO">
					<p>“Places of nestling green, for poets made.”</p>
					<footer>
						<p>Leigh Hunt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Story of Rimini</i>.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-23"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">I stood tiptoe upon a little hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The air was cooling, and so very still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the sweet buds which with a modest pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pull droopingly, in slanting curve aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their scantly-leaved and finely tapering stems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not yet lost those starry diadems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caught from the early sobbing of the morn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clouds were pure and white as flocks new shorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fresh from the clear brook; sweetly they slept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the blue fields of heaven, and then there crept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little noiseless noise among the leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Born of the very sigh that silence heaves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For not the faintest motion could be seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the shades that slanted o’er the green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was wide wand’ring for the greediest eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To peer about upon variety;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far round the horizon’s crystal air to skim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trace the dwindled edgings of its brim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To picture out the quaint and curious bending</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a fresh woodland alley, never-ending;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or by the bowery clefts, and leafy shelves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guess where the jaunty streams refresh themselves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I gazed awhile, and felt as light and free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though the fanning wings of Mercury</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had played upon my heels: I was light-hearted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many pleasures to my vision started;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I straightway began to pluck a posey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of luxuries bright, milky, soft, and rosy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">A bush of May flowers with the bees about them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, sure no tasteful nook could be without them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let a lush laburnum oversweep them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let long grass grow round the roots to keep them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moist, cool, and green; and shade the violets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they may bind the moss in leafy nets.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-24"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">A filbert hedge with wild briar overtwined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clumps of woodbine taking the soft wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon their summer thrones; there too should be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The frequent chequer of a youngling tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with a score of light green brethren shoots</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the quaint mossiness of aged roots:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round which is heard a spring-head of clear waters</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Babbling so wildly of its lovely daughters</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spreading blue-bells: it may haply mourn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That such fair clusters should be rudely torn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From their fresh beds, and scattered thoughtlessly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By infant hands, left on the path to die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Open afresh your round of starry folds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye ardent marigolds!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dry up the moisture from your golden lids,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For great Apollo bids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in these days your praises should be sung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On many harps, which he has lately strung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when again your dewiness he kisses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell him, I have you in my world of blisses:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So haply when I rove in some far vale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mighty voice may come upon the gale.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-25"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Here are sweet peas, on tiptoe for a flight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wings of gentle flush o’er delicate white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And taper fingers catching at all things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bind them all about with tiny rings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Linger awhile upon some bending planks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That lean against a streamlet’s rushy banks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And watch intently Nature’s gentle doings:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They will be found softer than ring-dove’s cooings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How silent comes the water round that bend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not the minutest whisper does it send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the o’erhanging sallows: blades of grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slowly across the chequer’d shadows pass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, you might read two sonnets, ere they reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where the hurrying freshnesses aye preach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A natural sermon o’er their pebbly beds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where swarms of minnows show their little heads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Staying their wavy bodies ’gainst the streams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To taste the luxury of sunny beams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Temper’d with coolness. How they ever wrestle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With their own sweet delight, and ever nestle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their silver bellies on the pebbly sand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you but scantily hold out the hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That very instant not one will remain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But turn your eye, and they are there again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ripples seem right glad to reach those cresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cool themselves among the em’rald tresses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The while they cool themselves, they freshness give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And moisture, that the bowery green may live:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So keeping up an interchange of favours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like good men in the truth of their behaviours.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes goldfinches one by one will drop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From low-hung branches; little space they stop;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sip, and twitter, and their feathers sleek;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then off at once, as in a wanton freak:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or perhaps, to show their black and golden wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pausing upon their yellow flutterings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were I in such a place, I sure should pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That nought less sweet might call my thoughts away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the soft rustle of a maiden’s gown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fanning away the dandelion’s down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the light music of her nimble toes </span>
					<br/>
					<span>atting against the sorrel as she goes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How she would start, and blush, thus to be caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Playing in all her innocence of thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me lead her gently o’er the brook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watch her half-smiling lips, and downward look;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me for one moment touch her wrist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me one moment to her breathing list;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as she leaves me, may she often turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her fair eyes looking through her locks auburne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What next? A tuft of evening primroses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er which the mind may hover till it dozes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er which it well might take a pleasant sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that ’tis ever startled by the leap</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-26"/>
					<span>Of buds into ripe flowers; or by the flitting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of diverse moths, that aye their rest are quitting;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or by the moon lifting her silver rim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above a cloud, and with a gradual swim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coming into the blue with all her light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Maker of sweet poets, dear delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this fair world, and all its gentle livers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spangler of clouds, halo of crystal rivers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mingler with leaves, and dew and tumbling streams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Closer of lovely eyes to lovely dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lover of loneliness, and wandering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of upcast eye, and tender pondering!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee must I praise above all other glories</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That smile us on to tell delightful stories.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what has made the sage or poet write</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the fair paradise of Nature’s light?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the calm grandeur of a sober line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We see the waving of the mountain pine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when a tale is beautifully staid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We feel the safety of a hawthorn glade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it is moving on luxurious wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul is lost in pleasant smotherings:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair dewy roses brush against our faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flowering laurels spring from diamond vases;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erhead we see the jasmine and sweet-briar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bloomy grapes laughing from green attire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While at our feet, the voice of crystal bubbles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charms us at once away from all our troubles:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that we feel uplifted from the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walking upon the white clouds wreath’d and curl’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So felt he, who first told, how Psyche went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the smooth wind to realms of wonderment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What Psyche felt, and Love, when their full lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First touch’d; what amorous and fondling nips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They gave each other’s cheeks; with all their sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how they kist each other’s tremulous eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silver lamp,⁠—the ravishment,⁠—the wonder,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The darkness,⁠—loneliness,⁠—the fearful thunder;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-27"/>
					<span>Their woes gone by, and both to heaven upflown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bow for gratitude before Jove’s throne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did he feel, who pull’d the boughs aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we might look into a forest wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To catch a glimpse of Fauns, and Dryades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coming with softest rustle through the trees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And garlands woven of flowers wild, and sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upheld on ivory wrists, or sporting feet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Telling us how fair, trembling Syrinx fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arcadian Pan, with such a fearful dread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor Nymph,⁠—poor Pan,⁠—how he did weep to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought but a lovely sighing of the wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the reedy stream; a half-heard strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of sweet desolation⁠—balmy pain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">What first inspired a bard of old to sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Narcissus pining o’er the untainted spring?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In some delicious ramble, he had found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little space, with boughs all woven round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the midst of all, a clearer pool</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than e’er reflected in its pleasant cool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blue sky here, and there, serenely peeping</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through tendril wreaths fantastically creeping.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the bank a lonely flower he spied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A meek and forlorn flower, with naught of pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drooping its beauty o’er the watery clearness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To woo its own sad image into nearness:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deaf to light Zephyrus it would not move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still would seem to droop, to pine, to love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So while the Poet stood in this sweet spot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some fainter gleamings o’er his fancy shot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor was it long ere he had told the tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of young Narcissus, and sad Echo’s bale.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-28"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Where had he been, from whose warm head out-flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sweetest of all songs, that ever new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That aye refreshing, pure deliciousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coming ever to bless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wanderer by moonlight? to him bringing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shapes from the invisible world, unearthly singing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out the middle air, from flowery nests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the pillowy silkiness that rests</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full in the speculation of the stars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! surely he had burst our mortal bars;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into some wond’rous region he had gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To search for thee, divine Endymion!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He was a Poet, sure a lover too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who stood on Latmus’ top, what time there blew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft breezes from the myrtle vale below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brought in faintness solemn, sweet, and slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hymn from Dian’s temple; while upswelling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The incense went to her own starry dwelling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though her face was clear as infant’s eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though she stood smiling o’er the sacrifice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Poet wept at her so piteous fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wept that such beauty should be desolate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So in fine wrath some golden sounds he won.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave meek Cynthia her Endymion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Queen of the wide air; thou most lovely queen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the brightness that mine eyes have seen!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou exceedest all things in thy shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So every tale, does this sweet tale of thine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O for three words of honey, that I might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell but one wonder of thy bridal night!</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-29"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Where distant ships do seem to show their keels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phœbus awhile delay’d his mighty wheels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turn’d to smile upon thy bashful eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere he his unseen pomp would solemnize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The evening weather was so bright, and clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That men of health were of unusual cheer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stepping like Homer at the trumpet’s call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or young Apollo on the pedestal:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lovely women were as fair and warm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Venus looking sideways in alarm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breezes were ethereal, and pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crept through half closed lattices to cure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The languid sick; it cool’d their fever’d sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soothed them into slumbers full and deep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon they awoke clear-eyed: nor burnt with thirsting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor with hot fingers, nor with temples bursting:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And springing up, they met the wond’ring sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their dear friends, nigh foolish with delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who feel their arms, and breasts, and kiss and stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on their placid foreheads part the hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young men and maidens at each other gaz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hands held back, and motionless, amaz’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see the brightness in each other’s eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so they stood, fill’d with a sweet surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until their tongues were loos’d in poesy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore no lover did of anguish die:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the soft numbers, in that moment spoken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made silken ties, that never may be broken.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cynthia! I cannot tell the greater blisses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That follow’d thine, and thy dear shepherd’s kisses:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was there a Poet born?⁠—But now no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My wand’ring spirit must no further soar.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sleep-and-poetry" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sleep and Poetry</h3>
				<blockquote class="TODO">
					<p xml:lang="enm">
						<span>As I lay in my bed slepe full umnete</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was unto me, but why that I ne might</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rest I ne wist, for there n’ as erthly wight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(As I suppose) had more of hertis ese</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than I, for I n’ ad sicknesse nor disese.</span>
					</p>
					<footer>
						<p>Chaucer.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-30"/>
				<p>
					<span>What is more gentle than a wind in summer?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is more soothing than the pretty hummer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stays one moment in an open flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And buzzes cheerily from bower to bower?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is more tranquil than a musk-rose blowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a green island, far from all men’s knowing?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More healthful than the leafiness of dales?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More secret than a nest of nightingales?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More serene than Cordelia’s countenance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More full of visions than a high romance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What, but thee, Sleep? Soft closer of our eyes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Low murmurer of tender lullabies!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light hoverer around our happy pillows!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wreather of poppy buds, and weeping willows!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silent entangler of a beauty’s tresses!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most happy listener! when the morning blesses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee for enlivening all the cheerful eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That glance so brightly at the new sunrise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But what is higher beyond thought than thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresher than berries of a mountain-tree?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More strange, more beautiful, more smooth, more regal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than wings of swans, than doves, than dim-seen eagle?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is it? And to what shall I compare it?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It has a glory, and nought else can share it:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thought thereof is awful, sweet, and holy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chasing away all worldliness and folly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coming sometimes like fearful claps of thunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the low rumblings earth’s regions under;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometimes like a gentie whispering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the secrets of some wond’rous thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That breathes about us in the vacant air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that we look around with prying stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps to see shapes of light, aerial limning;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And catch soft floatings from a faint-heard hymning;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see the laurel wreath, on high suspended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is to crown our name when life is ended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes it gives a glory to the voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the heart up-springs, rejoice! rejoice!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sounds which will reach the Framer of all things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And die away in ardent mutterings.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-31"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">No one who once the glorious sun has seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the clouds, and felt his bosom clean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his great Maker’s presence, but must know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What’t is I mean, and feel his being glow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore no insult will I give his spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By telling what he sees from native merit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O Poesy! for thee I hold my pen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That am not yet a glorious denizen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy wide heaven⁠—should I rather kneel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon some mountain-top until I feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A growing splendour round about me hung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And echo back the voice of thine own tongue?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Poesy! for thee I grasp my pen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That am not yet a glorious denizen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy wide heaven; yet, to my ardent prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yield from thy sanctuary some clear air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smoothed for intoxication by the breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flowering bays, that I may die a death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of luxury, and my young spirit follow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The morning sunbeams to the great Apollo</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a fresh sacrifice; or, if I can bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The o’erwhelming sweets, ’t will bring to me the fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Visions of all places: a bowery nook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will be elysium⁠—an eternal book</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence I may copy many a lovely saying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the leaves, and flowers⁠—about the playing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of nymphs in woods, and fountains; and the shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keeping a silence round a sleeping maid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a verse from so strange influence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we must ever wonder how, and whence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It came. Also imaginings will hover</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-32"/>
					<span>Round my fire-side, and haply there discover</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vistas of solemn beauty, where I’d wander</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In happy silence, like the clear Meander</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through its lone vales; and where I found a spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of awfuller shade, or an enchanted grot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a green hill o’erspread with chequer’d dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flowers, and fearful from its loveliness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Write on my tablets all that was permitted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that was for our human senses fitted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the events of this wide world I’d seize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a strong giant, and my spirit tease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till at its shoulders it should proudly see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wings to find out an immortality.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Stop and consider! life is but a day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fragile dewdrop on its perilous way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From a tree’s summit; a poor Indian’s sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While his boat hastens to the monstrous steep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Montmorenci. Why so sad a moan?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life is the rose’s hope while yet unblown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The reading of an ever-changing tale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The light uplifting of a maiden’s veil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pigeon tumbling in clear summer air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A laughing school-boy, without grief or care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Riding the springy branches of an elm.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O for ten years, that I may overwhelm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself in poesy; so I may do the deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That my own soul has to itself decreed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I will pass the countries that I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In long perspective, and continually</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taste their pure fountains. First the realm I’ll pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Flora, and old Pan: sleep in the grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feed upon apples red, and strawberries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And choose each pleasure that my fancy sees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Catch the white-handed nymphs in shady places,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To woo sweet kisses from averted faces,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-33"/>
					<span>Play with their fingers, touch their shoulders white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a pretty shrinking with a bite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hard as lips can make it: till agreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lovely tale of human life we’ll read.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one will teach a tame dove how it best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May fan the cool air gently o’er my rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another, bending o’er her nimble tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will set a green robe floating round her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still will dance with ever-varied ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiling upon the flowers and the trees:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another will entice me on, and on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through almond blossoms and rich cinnamon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till in the bosom of a leafy world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We rest in silence, like two gems upcurl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the recesses of a pearly shell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And can I ever bid these joys farewell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, I must pass them for a nobler life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I may find the agonies, the strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of human hearts: for lo! I see afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’ersailing the blue cragginess, a car</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And steeds with streamy manes⁠—the charioteer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looks out upon the winds with glorious fear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now the numerous tramplings quiver lightly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along a huge cloud’s ridge; and now with sprightly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wheel downward come they into fresher skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tipt round with silver from the sun’s bright eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still downward with capacious whirl they glide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now I see them on a green-hill’s side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In breezy rest among the nodding stalks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The charioteer with wond’rous gesture talks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the trees and mountains; and there soon appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shapes of delight, of mystery, and fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passing along before a dusky space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made by some mighty oaks: as they would chase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some ever-fleeting music, on they sweep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! how they murmur, laugh, and smile, and weep:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-34"/>
					<span>Some with upholden hand and mouth severe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some with their faces muffled to the ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between their arms; some, clear in youthful bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go glad and smilingly athwart the gloom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some looking back, and some with upward gaze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, thousands in a thousand different ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flit onward⁠—now a lovely wreath of girls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dancing their sleek hair into tangled curls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now broad wings. Most awfully intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The driver of those steeds is forward bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seems to listen: O that I might know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that he writes with such a hurrying glow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The visions all are fled⁠—the car is fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the light of heaven, and in their stead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sense of real things comes doubly strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, like a muddy stream, would bear along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul to nothingness: but I will strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against all doubtings, and will keep alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thought of that same chariot, and the strange</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Journey it went.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-35"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Is there so small a range</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the present strength of manhood, that the high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imagination cannot freely fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As she was wont of old? prepare her steeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paw up against the light, and do strange deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the clouds? Has she not shewn us all?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the clear space of ether, to the small</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breath of new buds unfolding? From the meaning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Jove’s large eyebrow, to the tender greening</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of April meadows? here her altar shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en in this isle; and who could paragon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fervid choir that lifted up a noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of harmony, to where it aye will poise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its mighty self of convoluting sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Huge as a planet, and like that roll round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternally around a dizzy void?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ay, in those days the Muses were nigh cloy’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With honours; nor had any other care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than to sing out and soothe their wavy hair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Could all this be forgotten? Yes, a schism</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nurtured by foppery and barbarism,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made great Apollo blush for this his land.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men were thought wise who could not understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His glories: with a puling infant’s force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They sway’d about upon a rocking-horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thought it Pegasus. Ah, dismal-soul’d!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The winds of heaven blew, the ocean roll’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its gathering waves⁠—ye felt it not. The blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bared its eternal bosom, and the dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of summer nights collected still to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The morning precious: beauty was awake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why were ye not awake? But ye were dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To things ye knew not of,⁠—were closely wed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To musty laws lined out with wretched rule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And compass vile: so that ye taught a school</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dolts to smooth, inlay, and clip, and fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, like the certain wands of Jacob’s wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their verses tallied. Easy was the task:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand handicraftsmen wore the mask</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Poesy. Ill-fated, impious race!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That blasphem’d the bright Lyrist to his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And did not know it,⁠—no, they went about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holding a poor, decrepid standard out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark’d with most flimsy mottoes, and in large</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The name of one Boileau!</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-36"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O ye whose charge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is to hover round our pleasant hills!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose congregated majesty so fills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My boundly reverence, that I cannot trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your hallowed names, in this unholy place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So near those common folk; did not their shames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affright you? Did our old lamenting Thames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delight you? did ye never cluster round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delicious Avon, with a mournful sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And weep? Or did ye wholly bid adieu</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To regions where no more the laurel grew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or did ye stay to give a welcoming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To some lone spirits who could proudly sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their youth away, and die? ’T was even so:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let me think away those times of woe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now ’t is a fairer season; ye have breathed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich benedictions o’er us; ye have wreathed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh garlands: for sweet music has been heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In many places;⁠—some has been upstirr’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out its crystal dwelling in a lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a swan’s ebon bill; from a thick brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nested and quiet in a valley mild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bubbles a pipe; fine sounds are floating wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the earth: happy are ye and glad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things are, doubtless; yet in truth we’ve had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange thunders from the potency of song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mingled indeed with what is sweet and strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From majesty: but in clear truth the themes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are ugly clubs, the Poets Polyphemes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disturbing the grand sea. A drainless shower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of light is Poesy; ’t is the supreme of power;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is might half slumb’ring on its own right arm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very archings of her eyelids charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand willing agents to obey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still she governs with the mildest sway:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But strength alone though of the Muses born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is like a fallen angel: trees uptorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darkness, and worms, and shrouds, and sepulchres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delight it; for it feeds upon the burrs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thorns of life; forgetting the great end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Poesy, that it should be a friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To soothe the cares, and lift the thoughts of man.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-37"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Yet I rejoice: a myrtle fairer than</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’er grow in Paphos, from the bitter weeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifts its sweet head into the air, and feeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A silent space with ever sprouting green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All tenderest birds there find a pleasant screen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Creep through the shade with jaunty fluttering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nibble the little cupped flowers and sing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then let us clear away the choking thorns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From round its gentle stem; let the young fawns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yeanèd in after-times, when we are flown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Find a fresh sward beneath it, overgrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With simple flowers: let there nothing be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More boisterous than a lover’s bended knee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought more ungentle than the placid look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of one who leans upon a closèd book;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought more untranquil than the grassy slopes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between two hills. All hail, delightful hopes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As she was wont, th’ imagination</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into most lovely labyrinths will be gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they shall be accounted poet kings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who simply tell the most heart-easing things.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O may these joys be ripe before I die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Will not some say that I presumptuously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have spoken? that from hastening disgrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T were better far to hide my foolish face?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That whining boyhood should with reverence bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere the dread thunderbolt could reach? How!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I do hide myself, it sure shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the very fane, the light of Poesy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I do fall, at least I will be laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the silence of a poplar shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over me the grass shall be smooth shaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there shall be a kind memorial graven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But off, Despondence! miserable bane!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They should not know thee, who athirst to gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A noble end, are thirsty every hour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What though I am not wealthy in the dower</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-38"/>
					<span>Of spanning wisdom; though I do not know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shiftings of the mighty winds that blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hither and thither all the changing thoughts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of man: though no great minist’ring reason sorts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out the dark mysteries of human souls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To clear conceiving: yet there ever rolls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vast idea before me, and I glean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefrom my liberty; thence too I’ve seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The end and aim of Poesy. ’T is clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As anything most true; as that the year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is made of the four seasons⁠—manifest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a large cross, some old cathedral’s crest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifted to the white clouds. Therefore should I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be but the essence of deformity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A coward, did my very eyelids wink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At speaking out what I have dared to think.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! rather let me like a madman run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over some precipice; let the hot sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melt my Dædalian wings, and drive me down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Convuls’d and headlong! Stay! an inward frown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of conscience bids me be more calm awhile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An ocean dim, sprinkled with many an isle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spreads awfully before me. How much toil!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many days! what desperate turmoil!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere I can have explored its widenesses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, what a task! upon my bended knees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could unsay those⁠—no, impossible!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impossible!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">For sweet relief I’ll dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On humbler thoughts, and let this strange assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begun in gentleness die so away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en now all tumult from my bosom fades:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I turn full-hearted to the friendly aids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That smooth the path of honour; brotherhood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And friendliness the nurse of mutual good.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hearty grasp that sends a pleasant sonnet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the brain ere one can think upon it;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-39"/>
					<span>The silence when some rhymes are coming out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when they’re come, the very pleasant rout:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The message certain to be done to-morrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is perhaps as well that it should be to borrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some precious book from out its snug retreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cluster round it when we next shall meet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce can I scribble on; for lovely airs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are fluttering round the room like doves in pairs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many delights of that glad day recalling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When first my senses caught their tender falling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with these airs come forms of elegance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stooping their shoulders o’er a horse’s prance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Careless, and grand⁠—fingers soft and round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parting luxuriant curls;⁠—and the swift bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Bacchus from his chariot, when his eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made Ariadne’s cheek look blushingly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus I remember all the pleasant flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of words at opening a portfolio.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Things such as these are ever harbingers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To trains of peaceful images: the stirs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a swan’s neck unseen among the rushes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A linnet starting all about the bushes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A butterfly, with golden wings broad parted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nestling a rose, convuls’d as though it smarted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With over pleasure⁠—many, many more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might I indulge at large in all my store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of luxuries: yet I must not forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleep, quiet with his poppy coronet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what there may be worthy in these rhymes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I partly owe to him: and thus, the chimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of friendly voices had just given place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To as sweet a silence, when I ’gan retrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pleasant day, upon a couch at ease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a poet’s house who keeps the keys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of pleasure’s temple. Round about were hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glorious features of the bards who sung</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-40"/>
					<span>In other ages⁠—cold and sacred busts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiled at each other. Happy he who trusts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To clear Futurity his darling fame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then there were fauns and satyrs taking aim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At swelling apples with a frisky leap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reaching fingers, ’mid a luscious heap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of vine leaves. Then there rose to view a fane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of liny marble, and thereto a train</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of nymphs approaching fairly o’er the sward:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One, loveliest, holding her white hand toward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dazzling sunrise: two sisters sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bending their graceful figures till they meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the trippings of a little child:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some are hearing, eagerly, the wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrilling liquidity of dewy piping.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See, in another picture, nymphs are wiping</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cherishingly Diana’s timorous limbs;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fold of lawny mantle dabbling swims</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the bath’s edge, and keeps a gentle motion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the subsiding crystal: as when ocean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaves calmly its broad swelling smoothiness o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its rocky marge, and balances once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The patient weeds; that now unshent by foam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feel all about their undulating home.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Sappho’s meek head was there half smiling down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At nothing; just as though the earnest frown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of over-thinking had that moment gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From off her brow, and left her all alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Great Alfred’s too, with anxious, pitying eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if he always listened to the sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the goaded world; and Kosciusko’s, worn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By horrid suffrance⁠—mightily forlorn.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-41"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Petrarch, outstepping from the shady green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Starts at the sight of Laura; nor can wean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes from her sweet face. Most happy they!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For over them was seen a free display</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of outspread wings, and from between them shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The face of Poesy: from off her throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She overlook’d things that I scarce could tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very sense of where I was might well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep Sleep aloof: but more than that there came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought after thought to nourish up the flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within my breast; so that the morning light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surprised me even from a sleepless night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up I rose refresh’d, and glad, and gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resolving to begin that very day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These lines; and howsoever they be done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I leave them as a father does his son.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="epistle-to-my-brother-george" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Epistle to My Brother George</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Full many a dreary hour have I past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My brain bewilder’d, and my mind o’ercast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With heaviness; in seasons when I’ve thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No spherey strains by me could e’er be caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the blue dome, though I to dimness gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the far depth where sheeted lightning plays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, on the wavy grass outstretch’d supinely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pry ’mong the stars, to strive to think divinely:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I should never hear Apollo’s song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though feathery clouds were floating all along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The purple west, and, two bright streaks between,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The golden lyre itself were dimly seen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the still murmur of the honey bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would never teach a rural song to me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the bright glance from beauty’s eyelids slanting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would never make a lay of mine enchanting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or warm my breast with ardour to unfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some tale of love and arms in time of old.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-42"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But there are times, when those that love the bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fly from all sorrowing far, far away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sudden glow comes on them, nought they see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In water, earth, or air, but poesy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It has been said, dear George, and true I hold it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For knightly Spenser to Libertas told it,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when a Poet is in such a trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In air he sees white coursers paw and prance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bestridden of gay knights, in gay apparel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who at each other tilt in playful quarrel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what we, ignorantly, sheet-lightning call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is the swift opening of their wide portal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the bright warder blows his trumpet clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose tones reach nought on earth but Poet’s ear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When these enchanted portals open wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through the light the horsemen swiftly glide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Poet’s eye can reach those golden halls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And view the glory of their festivals:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ladies fair, that in the distance seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit for the silv’ring of a seraph’s dream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their rich brimm’d goblets, that incessant run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the bright spots that move about the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when upheld, the wine from each bright jar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pours with the lustre of a falling star.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet further off are dimly seen their bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which no mortal eye can reach the flowers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’t is right just, for well Apollo knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T would make the Poet quarrel with the rose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that’s reveal’d from that far seat of blisses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is, the clear fountains’ interchanging kisses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As gracefully descending, light and thin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like silver streaks across a dolphin’s fin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he upswimmeth from the coral caves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sports with half his tail above the waves.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-43"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">These wonders strange he sees, and many more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose head is pregnant with poetic lore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should he upon an evening ramble fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With forehead to the soothing breezes bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would he nought see but the dark, silent blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all its diamonds trembling through and through?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the coy moon, when in the waviness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of whitest clouds she does her beauty dress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And staidly paces higher up, and higher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a sweet nun in holiday attire?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, yes! much more would start into his sight⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The revelries, and mysteries of night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And should I ever see them, I will tell you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such tales as needs must with amazement spell you.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">These are the living pleasures of the bard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But richer far posterity’s award.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What does he murmur with his latest breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While his proud eye looks through the film of death?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What though I leave this dull and earthly mould</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet shall my spirit lofty converse hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With after times.⁠—The patriot shall feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My stern alarum, and unsheath his steel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in the senate thunder out my number</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To startle princes from their easy slumber.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sage will mingle with each moral theme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My happy thoughts sententious; he will teem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lofty periods when my verses fire him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then I’ll stoop from heaven to inspire him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lays have I left of such a dear delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That maids will sing them on their bridal night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gay villagers, upon a morn of May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they have tired their gentle limbs with play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And form’d a snowy circle on the grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plac’d in midst of all that lovely lass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who chosen is their queen,⁠—with her fine head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crownèd with flowers purple, white, and red.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-44"/>
					<span>For there the lily, and the musk-rose, sighing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are emblems true of hapless lovers dying;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between her breasts, that never yet felt trouble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bunch of violets full blown, and double,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Serenely sleep:⁠—she from a casket takes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little book,⁠—and then a joy awakes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About each youthful heart,⁠—with stifled cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rubbing of white hands, and sparkling eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she’s to read a tale of hopes and fears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One that I foster’d in my youthful years:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pearls, that on each glist’ning circlet sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gush ever and anon with silent creep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lured by the innocent dimples. To sweet rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall the dear babe, upon its mother’s breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be lull’d with songs of mine. Fair world, adieu!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy dales and hills are falling from my view:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swiftly I mount, upon wide-spreading pinions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the narrow bounds of thy dominions.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full joy I feel, while thus I cleave the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That my soft verse will charm tliy daughters fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And warm thy sons!” Ah, my dear friend and brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could I, at once, my mad ambition smother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For tasting joys like these, sure I should be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happier, and dearer to society.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At times, ’t is true, I’ve felt relief from pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When some bright thought has darted through my brain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all that day I’ve felt a greater pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than if I’d brought to light a hidden treasure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to my sonnets, though none else should heed them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I feel delighted, still, that you should read them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of late, too, I have had much calm enjoyment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretch’d on the grass at my best lov’d employment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of scribbling lines for you. These things I thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While, in my face, thy freshest breeze I caught.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-45"/>
					<span>E’en now I’m pillow’d on a bed of flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That crowns a lofty cliff, which proudly towers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the ocean waves. The stalks and blades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chequer my tablet with their quivering shades.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On one side is a field of drooping oats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which the poppies show their scarlet coats;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So pert and useless, that they bring to mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scarlet coats that pester human-kind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the other side, outspread, is seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ocean’s blue mantle, streak’d with purple, and green;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now ’t is I see a canvass’d ship, and now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark the bright silver curling round her prow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see the lark down-dropping to his nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the broad-winged sea-gull never at rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when no more he spreads his feathers free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His breast is dancing on the restless sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I direct my eyes into the west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which at this moment is in sunbeams drest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why westward turn? ’T was but to say adieu!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T was but to kiss my hand, dear George, to you!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-my-brother-george" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To My Brother George</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Many the wonders I this day have seen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sun, when first he kist away the tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fill’d the eyes of morn;⁠—the laurell’d peers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who from the feathery gold of evening lean;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ocean with its vastness, its blue green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its ships, its rocks, its caves, its hopes, its fears,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its voice mysterious, which whoso hears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must think on what will be, and what has been.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en now, dear George, while this for you I write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cynthia is from her silken curtains peeping</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So scantly, that it seems her bridal night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she her half-discover’d revels keeping.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what, without the social thought of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would be the wonders of the sky and sea?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<div class="newpage" id="page-46"/>
			<article id="to-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To ⸻</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Had I a man’s fair form, then might my sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be echoed swiftly through that ivory shell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine ear, and find thy gentle heart; so well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would passion arm me for the enterprise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ah! I am no knight whose foeman dies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No cuirass glistens on my bosom’s swell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am no happy shepherd of the dell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose lips have trembled with a maiden’s eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet must I dote upon thee⁠—call thee sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweeter by far than Hybla’s honied roses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When steep’d in dew rich to intoxication.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! I will taste that dew, for me ’t is meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when the moon her pallid face discloses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I’ll gather some by spells, and incantation.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="specimen-of-an-induction-to-a-poem" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Specimen of an Induction to a Poem</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lo! I must tell a tale of chivalry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For large white plumes are dancing in mine eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not like the formal crest of latter days:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bending in a thousand graceful ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So graceful, that it seems no mortal hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or e’en the touch of Archimago’s wand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could charm them into such an attitude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We must think rather, that in playful mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some mountain breeze had turned its chief delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To show this wonder of its gentle might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! I must tell a tale of chivalry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For while I muse, the lance points slantingly</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-47"/>
					<span>Athwart the morning air; some lady sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who cannot feel for cold her tender feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the worn top of some old battlement</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hails it with tears, her stout defender sent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from her own pure self no joy dissembling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wraps round her ample robe with happy trembling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes, when the good Knight his rest would take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is reflected, clearly, in a lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the young ashen boughs, ’gainst which it rests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And th’ half-seen mossiness of linnets’ nests.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! shall I ever tell its cruelty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the fire flashes from a warrior’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his tremendous hand is grasping it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his dark brow for very wrath is knit?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or when his spirit, with more calm intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaps to the honours of a tournament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And makes the gazers round about the ring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stare at the grandeur of the balancing?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, no! this is far off:⁠—then how shall I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revive the dying tones of minstrelsy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which linger yet about long gothic arches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dark green ivy, and among wild larches?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How sing the splendour of the revelries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When butts of wine are drunk off to the lees?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that bright lance, against the fretted wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the shade of stately banneral,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is slung with shining cuirass, sword, and shield?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where ye may see a spur in bloody field.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light-footed damsels move with gentle paces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round the wide hall, and show their happy faces;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or stand in courtly talk by fives and sevens:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like those fair stars that twinkle in the heavens.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet must I tell a tale of chivalry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or wherefore comes that knight so proudly by?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore more proudly does the gentle knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rein in the swelling of his ample might?</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-48"/>
					<span>Spenser! thy brows are archèd, open, kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And come like a clear sunrise to my mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And always does my heart with pleasure dance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I think on thy noble countenance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where never yet was ought more earthly seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the pure freshness of thy laurels green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore, great bard, I not so fearfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call on thy gentle spirit to hover nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My daring steps: or if thy tender care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus startled unaware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be jealous that the foot of other wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should madly follow that bright path of light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trac’d by thy lov’d Libertas; he will speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tell thee that my prayer is very meek;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I will follow with due reverence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And start with awe at mine own strange pretence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him thou wilt hear; so I will rest in hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see wide plains, fair trees, and lawny slope:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The morn, the eve, the light, the shade, the flowers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clear streams, smooth lakes, and overlooking towers.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="calidore" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="fulltitle">
					<span epub:type="title">Calidore</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A Fragment</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Young Calidore is paddling o’er the lake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His healthful spirit eager and awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feel the beauty of a silent eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which seem’d full loth this happy world to leave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The light dwelt o’er the scene so lingeringly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bares his forehead to the cool blue sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And smiles at the far clearness all around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until his heart is well nigh over wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turns for calmness to the pleasant green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of easy slopes, and shadowy trees that lean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So elegantly o’er the waters’ brim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And show their blossoms trim.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-49"/>
					<span>Scarce can his clear and nimble eyesight follow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The freaks and dartings of the black-wing’d swallow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delighting much, to see it half at rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dip so refreshingly its wings, and breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst the smooth surface, and to mark anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The widening circles into nothing gone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And now the sharp keel of his little boat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes up with ripple, and with easy float,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glides into a bed of water-lilies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broad-leav’d are they, and their white canopies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are upward turn’d to catch the heavens’ dew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near to a little island’s point they grew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence Calidore might have the goodliest view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this sweet spot of earth. The bowery shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went off in gentle windings to the hoar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And light blue mountains: but no breathing man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a warm heart, and eye prepared to scan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature’s clear beauty, could pass lightly by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Objects that look’d out so invitingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On either side. These, gentle Calidore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greeted, as he had known them long before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The sidelong view of swelling leafiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which the glad setting sun in gold doth dress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence, ever and anon, the jay outsprings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scales upon the beauty of its wings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The lonely turret, shatter’d, and outworn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stands venerably proud; too proud to mourn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its long lost grandeur: fir-trees grow around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye dropping their hard fruit upon the ground.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The little chapel, with the cross above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upholding wreaths of ivy; the white dove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on the windows spreads his feathers light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seems from purple clouds to wing its flight.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-50"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Green tufted islands casting their soft shades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the lake; sequester’d leafy glades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That through the dimness of their twilight show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Large dock-leaves, spiral foxgloves, or the glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the cat’s wild eyes, or the silvery stems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of delicate birch-trees, or long grass which hems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little brook. The youth had long been viewing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These pleasant things, and heaven was bedewing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mountain flowers, when his glad senses caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A trumpet’s silver voice. Ah! it was fraught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many joys for him: the warder’s ken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had found white coursers prancing in the glen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Friends very dear to him he soon will see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So pushes off his boat most eagerly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon upon the lake he skims along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deaf to the nightingale’s first under-song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor minds he the white swans that dream so sweetly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spirit flies before him so completely.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And now he turns a jutting point of land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence may be seen the castle gloomy, and grand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor will a bee buzz round two swelling peaches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the point of his light shallop reaches</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those marble steps that through the water dip:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now over them he goes with hasty trip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scarcely stays to ope the folding doors:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon he leaps along the oaken floors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of halls and corridors.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-51"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Delicious sounds! those little bright-eyed things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That float about the air on azure wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had been less heartfelt by him than the clang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of clattering hoofs; into the court he sprang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as two noble steeds, and palfreys twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were slanting out their necks with loosen’d rein;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While from beneath the threat’ning portcullis</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They brought their happy burthens. What a kiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What gentle squeeze he gave each lady’s hand!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How tremblingly their delicate ankles spann’d!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into how sweet a trance his soul was gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While whisperings of affection</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made him delay to let their tender feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come to the earth; with an incline so sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From their low palfreys o’er his neck they bent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whether there were tears of languishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that the evening dew had pearl’d their tresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He feels a moisture on his cheek, and blesses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lips that tremble, and with glistening eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the soft luxury</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That nestled in his arms. A dimpled hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair as some wonder out of fairy land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung from his shoulder like the drooping flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of whitest Cassia, fresh from summer showers:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this he fondled with his happy cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if for joy he would no further seek;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the kind voice of good Sir Clerimond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came to his ear, like something from beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His present being: so he gently drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His warm arms, thrilling now with pulses new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From their sweet thrall, and forward gently bending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thank’d Heaven that his joy was never ending;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While ’gainst his forehead he devoutly press’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hand Heaven made to succour the distress’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hand that from the world’s bleak promontory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had lifted Calidore for deeds of glory.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-52"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Amid the pages, and the torches’ glare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There stood a knight, patting the flowing hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his proud horse’s mane: he was withal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man of elegance, and stature tall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the waving of his plumes would be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High as the berries of a wild ash-tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as the wingèd cap of Mercury.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His armour was so dexterously wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In shape, that sure no living man had thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It hard, and heavy steel: but that indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was some glorious form, some splendid weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which a spirit new come from the skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might live, and show itself to human eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is the far-fam’d, the brave Sir Gondibert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said the good man to Calidore alert;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the young warrior with a step of grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came up,⁠—a courtly smile upon his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mailèd hand held out, ready to greet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The large-eyed wonder, and ambitious heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the aspiring boy; who as he led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those smiling ladies, often turned his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To admire the visor arched so gracefully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over a knightly brow; while they went by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lamps that from the high-roof d hall were pendent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave the steel a shining quite transcendent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Soon in a pleasant chamber they are seated;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sweet-lipp’d ladies have already greeted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the green leaves that round the window clamber,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To show their purple stars, and bells of amber.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Gondibert has doff’d his shining steel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gladdening in the free, and airy feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a light mantle; and while Clerimond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is looking round about him with a fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And placid eye, young Calidore is burning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear of knightly deeds, and gallant spurning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all unworthiness; and how the strong of arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept off dismay, and terror, and alarm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From lovely woman; while brimful of this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gave each damsel’s hand so warm a kiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had such manly ardour in his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That each at other look’d half-staringly;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-53"/>
					<span>And then their features started into smiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet as blue heavens o’er enchanted isles.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Softly the breezes from the forest came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Softly they blew aside the taper’s flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clear was the song from Philomel’s far bower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grateful the incense from the lime-tree flower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mysterious, wild, the far heard trumpet’s tone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lovely the moon in ether, all alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet too the converse of these happy mortals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As that of busy spirits when the portals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are closing in the west; or that soft humming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We hear around when Hesperus is coming.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet be their sleep. …</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="epistle-to-charles-cowden-clarke" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Epistle to Charles Cowden Clarke</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Oft have you seen a swan superbly frowning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with proud breast his own white shadow crowning;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He slants his neck beneath the waters bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So silently, it seems a beam of light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come from the galaxy: anon he sports,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With outspread wings the Naiad Zephyr courts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ruffles all the surface of the lake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In striving from its crystal face to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some diamond water-drops, and them to treasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In milky nest, and sip them off at leisure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not a moment can he there insure them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor to such downy rest can he allure them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For down they rush as though they would be free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drop like hours into eternity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just like that bird am I in loss of time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whene’er I venture on the stream of rhyme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shatter’d boat, oar snapt, and canvas rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I slowly sail, scarce knowing my intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-54"/>
					<span>Still scooping up the water with my fingers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which a trembling diamond never lingers.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">By this, friend Charles, you may full plainly see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why I have never penn’d a line to thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because my thoughts were never free, and clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And little fit to please a classic ear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because my wine was of too poor a savour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one whose palate gladdens in the flavour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sparkling Helicon:⁠—small good it were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take him to a desert rude, and bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who had on Baiæ’s shore reclin’d at ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Tasso’s page was floating in a breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That gave soft music from Armida’s bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mingled with fragrance from her rarest flowers:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Small good to one who had by Mulla’s stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fondled the maidens with the breasts of cream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who had beheld Belphœbe in a brook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lovely Una in a leafy nook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Archimago leaning o’er his book:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who had of all that’s sweet tasted, and seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From silv’ry ripple, up to beauty’s queen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the sequester’d haunts of gay Titania,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the blue dwelling of divine Urania:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One, who of late had ta’en sweet forest walks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him who elegantly chats and talks⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wrong’d Libertas,⁠—who has told you stories</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of laurel chaplets, and Apollo’s glories;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of troops chivalrous prancing through a city,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tearful ladies made for love, and pity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many else which I have never known.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus have I thought; and days on days have flown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slowly, or rapidly⁠—unwilling stilly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For you to try my dull, unlearned quill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor should I now, but that I’ve known you long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you first taught me all the sweets of song:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-55"/>
					<span>The grand, the sweet, the terse, the free, the fine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What swell’d with pathos, and what right divine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spenserian vowels that elope with ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And float along like birds o’er summer seas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Miltonian storms, and more, Miltonian tenderness:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Michael in arms, and more, meek Eve’s fair slenderness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who read for me the sonnet swelling loudly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to its climax, and then dying proudly?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who found for me the grandeur of the ode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Growing, like Atlas, stronger from its load?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who let me taste that more than cordial dram,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sharp, the rapier-pointed epigram?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show’d me that epic was of all the king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round, vast, and spanning all, like Saturn’s ring?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You too upheld the veil from Clio’s beauty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pointed out the patriot’s stern duty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The might of Alfred, and the shaft of Tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hand of Brutus, that so grandly fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a tyrant’s head. Ah! had I never seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or known your kindness, what might I have been?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What my enjoyments in my youthful years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bereft of all that now my life endears?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And can I e’er these benefits forget?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And can I e’er repay the friendly debt?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, doubly no;⁠—yet should these rhymings please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall roll on the grass with twofold ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I have long time been my fancy feeding</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hopes that you would one day think the reading</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my rough verses not an hour misspent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should it e’er be so, what a rich content!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some weeks have pass’d since last I saw the spires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In lucent Thames reflected:⁠—warm desires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see the sun o’er-peep the eastern dimness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And morning shadows streaking into slimness,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-56"/>
					<span>Across the lawny fields, and pebbly water;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mark the time as they grow broad, and shorter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feel the air that plays about the hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sips its freshness from the little rills;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see high, golden corn wave in the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Cynthia smiles upon a summer’s night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And peers among the cloudlet’s jet and white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though she were reclining in a bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bean blossoms, in heaven freshly shed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sooner had I stepp’d into these pleasures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than I began to think of rhymes and measures;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The air that floated by me seem’d to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Write! thou wilt never have a better day.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so I did. When many lines I’d written,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though with their grace I was not oversmitten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, as my hand was warm, I thought I’d better</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trust to my feelings, and write you a letter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such an attempt required an inspiration</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a peculiar sort,⁠—a consummation;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, had I felt, these scribblings might have been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Verses from which the soul would never wean;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But many days have past since last my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was warm’d luxuriously by divine Mozart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Arne delighted, or by Handel madden’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or by the song of Erin pierc’d and sadden’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time you were before the music sitting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the rich notes to each sensation fitting.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since I have walk’d with you through shady lanes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That freshly terminate in open plains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And revell’d in a chat that ceasèd not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When at night-fall among your books we got:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, nor when supper came, nor after that,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor when reluctantly I took my hat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, nor till cordially you shook my hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mid-way between our homes:⁠—your accents bland</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still sounded in my ears, when I no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could hear your footsteps touch the grav’ly floor.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-57"/>
					<span>Sometimes I lost them, and then found again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You changed the foot-path for the grassy plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In those still moments I have wish’d you joys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That well you know to honour:⁠—“Life’s very toys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him,” said I, “will take a pleasant charm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It cannot be that ought will work him harm.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These thoughts now come o’er me with all their might:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again I shake your hand⁠—friend Charles, good night.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-my-brothers" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To My Brothers</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Small, busy flames play through the fresh-laid coals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their faint cracklings o’er our silence creep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like whispers of the household gods that keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gentle empire o’er fraternal souls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And while, for rhymes, I search around the poles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your eyes are fix’d, as in poetic sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the lore so voluble and deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That aye at fall of night our care condoles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is your birth-day, Tom, and I rejoice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thus it passes smoothly, quietly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many such eves of gently whisp’ring noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May we together pass, and calmly try</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What are this world’s true joys,⁠—ere the great Voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From its fair face, shall bid our spirits fly.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<div class="newpage" id="page-58"/>
			<article id="addressed-to-benjamin-robert-haydon" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Addressed to Benjamin Robert Haydon</h3>
				<h4 id="addressed-to-benjamin-robert-haydon-1" epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Great spirits now on earth are sojourning;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He of the cloud, the cataract, the lake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who on Helvellyn’s summit, wide awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Catches his freshness from Archangel’s wing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He of the rose, the violet, the spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The social smile, the chain for Freedom’s sake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lo!⁠—whose steadfastness would never take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A meaner sound than Raphael’s whispering.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And other spirits there are standing apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the forehead of the age to come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These, these will give the world another heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And other pulses. Hear ye not the hum</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mighty workings in the human mart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Listen awhile ye nations, and be dumb.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 id="addressed-to-benjamin-robert-haydon-2" epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Highmindedness, a jealousy for good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A loving-kindness for the great man’s fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dwells here and there with people of no name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In noisome alley, and in pathless wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where we think the truth least understood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft may be found a “singleness of aim,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ought to frighten into hooded shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A money-mong’ring, pitiable brood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How glorious this affection for the cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of steadfast genius, toiling gallantly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What when a stout unbending champion awes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Envy, and Malice to their native sty?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unnumber’d souls breathe out a still applause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud to behold him in his country’s eye.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-kosciusko" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To Kosciusko</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Good Kosciusko, thy great name alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is a full harvest whence to reap high feeling;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It comes upon us like the glorious pealing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the wide spheres⁠—an everlasting tone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now it tells me, that in worlds unknown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The names of heroes, burst from clouds concealing,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-59"/>
					<span class="i1">Are changed to harmonies, for ever stealing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through cloudless blue, and round each silver throne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It tells me too, that on a happy day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When some good spirit walks upon the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thy name with Alfred’s, and the great of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gently commingling, gives tremendous birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a loud hymn, that sounds far, far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To where the great God lives for evermore.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-g-a-w" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr class="name">G. A. W.</abbr></h3>
				<p>
					<span>Nymph of the downward smile and sidelong glance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In what diviner moments of the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Art thou most lovely? When gone far astray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the labyrinths of sweet utterance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or when serenely wand’ring in a trance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sober thought? Or when starting away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With careless robe, to meet the morning ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou spar’st the flowers in thy mazy dance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply ’t is when thy ruby lips part sweetly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so remain, because thou listenest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou to please wert nurtured so completely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I can never tell what mood is best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall as soon pronounce which Grace more neatly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trips it before Apollo than the rest.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="stanzas" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Stanzas</h3>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-60"/>
				<p>
					<span>In a drear-nighted December</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Too happy, happy tree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy branches ne’er remember</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Their green felicity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The north cannot undo them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a sleety whistle through them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor frozen thawings glue them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From budding at the prime.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In a drear-nighted December,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Too happy, happy brook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy bubblings ne’er remember</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Apollo’s summer look;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with a sweet forgetting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They stay their crystal fretting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never, never petting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">About the frozen time.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! would ’t were so with many</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A gentle girl and boy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But were there ever any</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Writh’d not at passèd joy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To know the change and feel it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When there is none to heal it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor numbèd sense to steal it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Was never said in rhyme.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="written-in-disgust-of-vulgar-superstition" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Written in Disgust of Vulgar Superstition</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The church bells toll a melancholy round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Calling the people to some other prayers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some other gloominess, more dreadful cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More hearkening to the sermon’s horrid sound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surely the mind of man is closely bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In some black spell; seeing that each one tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himself from fireside joys, and Lydian airs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And converse high of those with glory crown’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still, still they toll, and I should feel a damp⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A chill as from a tomb, did I not know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they are dying like an outburnt lamp;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That’t is their sighing, wailing ere they go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into oblivion;⁠—that fresh flowers will grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many glories of immortal stamp.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-61"/>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Happy is England! I could be content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see no other verdure than its own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To feel no other breezes than are blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through its tall woods with high romances blent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet do I sometimes feel a languishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For skies Italian, and an inward groan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sit upon an Alp as on a throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And half forget what world or worldling meant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy is England, sweet her artless daughters;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enough their simple loveliness for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Enough their whitest arms in silence clinging:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet do I often warmly burn to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Beauties of deeper glance, and hear their singing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And float with them about the summer waters.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="on-the-grasshopper-and-cricket" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On the Grasshopper and Cricket</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The poetry of earth is never dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all the birds are faint with the hot sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hide in cooling trees; a voice will run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From hedge to hedge about the new-mown mead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is the Grasshopper’s⁠—he takes the lead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In summer luxury,⁠—he has never done</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his delights; for when tired out with fun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rests at ease beneath some pleasant weed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poetry of earth is ceasing never:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On a lone winter evening, when the frost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Has wrought a silence, from the stove there shrills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Cricket’s song, in warmth increasing ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seems to one, in drowsiness half lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Grasshopper’s among some grassy hills.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-62"/>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>After dark vapours have oppress’d our plains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For a long dreary season, comes a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Born of the gentle South, and clears away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the sick heavens all unseemly stains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The anxious month, relieved its pains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Takes as a long-lost right the feel of May;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eyelids with the passing coolness play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like rose leaves with the drip of summer rains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And calmest thoughts come round us; as, of leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Budding,⁠—fruit ripening in stillness,⁠—Autumn suns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiling at eve upon the quiet sheaves,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet Sappho’s cheek,⁠—a sleeping infant’s breath,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gradual sand that through an hour-glass runs,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woodland rivulet,⁠—a Poet’s death.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="written-on-the-blank-space-at-the-end-of-chaucers-tale-of-the-floure-and-the-lefe" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Written on the Blank Space at the End of Chaucer’s Tale of “The Floure and the Lefe”</h3>
				<p>
					<span>This pleasant tale is like a little copse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The honied lines so freshly interlace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keep the reader in so sweet a place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that he here and there full-hearted stops;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oftentimes he feels the dewy drops</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come cool and suddenly against his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, by the wandering melody, may trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which way the tender-legged linnet hops.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! what a power has white simplicity!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What mighty power has this gentle story!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I, that do ever feel athirst for glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could at this moment be content to lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meekly upon the grass, as those whose sobbings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were heard of none beside the mournful robins.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-63"/>
			</article>
			<article id="on-seeing-the-elgin-marbles" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On Seeing the Elgin Marbles</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My spirit is too weak⁠—mortality</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weighs heavily on me like unwilling sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And each imagin’d pinnacle and steep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of godlike hardship tells me I must die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a sick Eagle looking at the sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet’t is a gentle luxury to weep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I have not the cloudy winds to keep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh for the opening of the morning’s eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such dim-conceivèd glories of the brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bring round the heart an indescribable feud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So do these wonders a most dizzy pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mingles Grecian grandeur with the rude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wasting of old Time⁠—with a billowy main⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sun⁠—a shadow of a magnitude.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-haydon" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="fulltitle">
					<span epub:type="title">To Haydon</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">(With the Preceding Sonnet)</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Haydon! forgive me that I cannot speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Definitively of these mighty things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forgive me, that I have not Eagle’s wings⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That what I want I know not where to seek:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And think that I would not be over meek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In rolling out upfollow’d thunderings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even to the steep of Heliconian springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were I of ample strength for such a freak⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think too, that all those numbers should be thine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose else? In this who touch thy vesture’s hem?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when men star’d at what was most divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With browless idiotism⁠—o’erwise phlegm⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hadst beheld the Hesperean shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their star in the East, and gone to worship them.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-64"/>
			</article>
			<article id="to-leigh-hunt-esq" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="fulltitle">
					<span epub:type="title">To Leigh Hunt, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">[A Dedication]</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Glory and loveliness have pass’d away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For if we wander ont in early morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No wreathèd incense do we see upborne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the east, to meet the smiling day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No crowd of nymphs soft-voic’d and young, and gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In woven baskets bringing ears of corn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Roses, and pinks, and violets, to adorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shrine of Flora in her early May.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there are left delights as high as these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I shall ever bless my destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in a time, when under pleasant trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pan is no longer sought, I feel a free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A leafy luxury, seeing I could please</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With these poor offerings, a man like thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="on-the-sea" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On the Sea</h3>
				<p>
					<span>It keeps eternal whisperings around</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Desolate shores, and with its mighty swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gluts twice ten thousand caverns, till the spell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hecate leaves them their old shadowy sound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Often ’tis in such gentle temper found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That scarcely will the very smallest shell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be mov’d for days from where it sometime fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When last the winds of Heaven were unbound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O ye! who have your eyeballs vex’d and tir’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feast them upon the wideness of the Sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">O ye! whose ears are dinn’d with uproar rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or fed too much with cloying melody—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sit ye near some old cavern’s mouth, and brood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until ye start, as if the sea-nymphs quired!</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-65"/>
			</article>
			<article id="lines" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Lines</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Unfelt, unheard, unseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ve left my little queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her languid arms in silver slumber lying:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! through their nestling touch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who⁠—who could tell how much</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is for madness⁠—cruel, or complying?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Those faery lids how sleek!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those lips how moist!⁠—they speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ripest quiet, shadows of sweet sounds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into my fancy’s ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Melting a burden dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How “Love doth know no fulness, and no bounds.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">True!⁠—tender monitors!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I bend unto your laws:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This sweetest day for dalliance was born!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, without more ado,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ll feel my heaven anew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the blushing of the hasty morn.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="on" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On ⸻</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Think not of it, sweet one, so;-</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give it not a tear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sigh thou mayst, and bid it go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Any⁠—any where.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Do not look so sad, sweet one,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad and fadingly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shed one drop, then it is gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh! ’t was born to die!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Still so pale? then dearest weep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weep, I’ll count the tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-66"/>
					<span>For each will I invent a bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thee in after years.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Brighter has it left thine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than a sunny rill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy whispering melodies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are more tender still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet⁠—as all things mourn awhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At fleeting blisses; </span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en let us too; but be our dirge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dirge of kisses.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="on-a-picture-of-leander" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On a Picture of Leander</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Come hither, all sweet maidens soberly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down-looking aye, and with a chasten’d light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hid in the fringes of your eyelids white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And meekly let your fair hands joined be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if so gentle that ye could not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Untouch’d, a victim of your beauty bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sinking away to his young spirit’s night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sinking bewilder’d ’mid the dreary sea:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is young Leander toiling to his death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nigh swooning, he doth purse his weary lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For Hero’s cheek, and smiles against her smile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O horrid dream! see how his body dips</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Dead-heavy; arms and shoulders gleam awhile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s gone; up bubbles all his amorous breath!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="on-leigh-hunts-poem-the-story-of-rimini" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On Leigh Hunt’s Poem, “<i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Story of Rimini</i>”</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Who loves to peer up at the morning sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With half-shut eyes and comfortable cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let him, with this sweet tale, full often seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For meadows where the little rivers run;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-67"/>
					<span>Who loves to linger with that brightest one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Heaven⁠—Hesperus⁠—let him lowly speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These numbers to the night, and starlight meek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or moon, if that her hunting be begun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who knows these delights, and too is prone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To moralize upon a smile or tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will find at once a region of his own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bower for his spirit, and will steer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To alleys, where the fir-tree drops its cone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where robins hop, and fallen leaves are sear.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When I have fears that I may cease to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before my pen has glean’d my teeming brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before high pilèd books, in charactry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hold like rich garners the full-ripen’d grain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I behold, upon the night’s starr’d face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge cloudy symbols of a high romance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And think that I may never live to trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their shadows, with the magic hand of chance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when I feel, fair creature of an hour!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I shall never look upon thee more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never have relish in the faery power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of unreflecting love;⁠—then on the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the wide world I stand alone, and think</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Love and Fame to nothingness do sink.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="on-seeing-a-lock-of-miltons-hair" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On Seeing a Lock of Milton’s Hair</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Chief of organic numbers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Scholar of the Spheres!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy spirit never slumbers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rolls about our ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ever and for ever!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O what a mad endeavour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Worketh he.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-68"/>
					<span>Who to thy sacred and ennobled hearse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would offer a burnt sacrifice of verse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And melody.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">How heavenward thou soundest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Live Temple of sweet noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Discord unconfoundest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Giving Delight new joys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Pleasure nobler pinions!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, where are thy dominions?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Lend thine ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a young Delian oath,⁠—ay, by thy soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all that from thy mortal lips did roll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the kernel of thine earthly love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauty, in things on earth, and things above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">I swear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When every childish fashion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Has vanish’d from my rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will I, grey-gone in passion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Leave to an after-time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Hymning and harmony</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thee, and of thy works, and of thy life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But vain is now the burning and the strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pangs are in vain, until I grow high-rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">With old Philosophy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mad with glimpses of futurity!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For many years my offering must be hush’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I do speak, I’ll think upon this hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because I feel my forehead hot and flush’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even at the simplest vassal of thy power,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A lock of thy bright hair⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sudden it came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I was startled, when I caught thy name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Coupled so unaware;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, at the moment, temperate was my blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought I had beheld it from the flood.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-69"/>
			</article>
			<article id="on-sitting-down-to-read-king-lear-once-again" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On Sitting Down to Read “<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">King Lear</i>” Once Again</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O golden-tongued Romance, with serene lute!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fair plumèd Syren, Queen of far away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leave melodizing on this wintry day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shut up thine olden pages, and be mute:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu! for once again the fierce dispute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Betwixt damnation and impassion’d clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must I burn through; once more humbly assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bitter sweet of this Shakespearean fruit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chief Poet! and ye clouds of Albion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begetters of our deep eternal theme!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When through the old oak forest I am gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let me not wander in a barren dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when I am consumèd in the Fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me new Phœnix-wings to fly at my desire.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="lines-on-the-mermaid-tavern" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Lines on the Mermaid Tavern</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Souls of Poets dead and gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What Elysium have ye known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy field or mossy cavern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choicer than the Mermaid Tavern?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have ye tippled drink more fine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than mine host’s Canary wine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or are fruits of Paradise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweeter than those dainty pies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of venison? O generous food!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drest as though bold Robin Hood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would, with his maid Marian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sup and bowse from horn and can.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">I have heard that on a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine host’s sign-board flew away,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-70"/>
					<span>Nobody knew whither, till</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An astrologer’s old quill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a sheepskin gave the story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said he saw you in your glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Underneath a new-old sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sipping beverage divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pledging with contented smack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Mermaid in the Zodiac.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Souls of Poets dead and gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What Elysium have ye known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy field or mossy cavern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choicer than the Mermaid Tavern?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="robin-hood" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="fulltitle">
					<span epub:type="title">Robin Hood</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">To a Friend</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>No! those days are gone away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their hours are old and gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their minutes buried all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the down-trodden pall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the leaves of many years:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many times have Winter’s shears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frozen North, and chilling East,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sounded tempests to the feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the forest’s whispering fleeces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since men knew nor rent nor leases.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">No, the bugle sounds no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the twanging bow no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silent is the ivory shrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past the heath and up the hill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no mid-forest laugh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where lone Echo gives the half</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To some wight, amaz’d to hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jesting, deep in forest drear.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-71"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">On the fairest time of June</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You may go, with sun or moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the seven stars to light you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the polar ray to right you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But you never may behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Little John,or Robin bold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never one, of all the clan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrumming on an empty can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some old hunting ditty, while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He doth his green way beguile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fair hostess Merriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down beside the pasture Trent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he left the merry tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Messenger for spicy ale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Gone, the merry morris din;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gone, the song of Gamelyn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gone, the tough-belted outlaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Idling in the “<i xml:lang="enm">grenè shawe</i>;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All are gone away and past!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if Robin should be cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sudden from his turfèd grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if Marian should have</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once again her forest days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would weep, and he would craze:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would swear, for all his oaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall’n beneath the dock-yard strokes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have rotted on the briny seas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would weep that her wild bees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sang not to her⁠—strange! that honey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can’t be got without hard money!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So it is; yet let us sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honour to the old bow-string!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honour to the bugle horn!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honour to the woods unshorn!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honour to the Lincoln green!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honour to the archer keen!</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-72"/>
					<span>Honour to tight little John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the horse he rode upon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honour to bold Robin Hood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleeping in the underwood!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honour to Maid Marian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to all the Sherwood clan!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though their days have hurried by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us two a burden try.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-the-nile" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To the Nile</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Son of the old moon-mountains African!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chief of the Pyramid and Crocodile!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We call thee fruitful, and that very while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A desert fills our seeing’s inward span;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nurse of swart nations since the world began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Art thou so fruitful? or dost thou beguile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such men to honour thee, who, worn with toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rest for a space ’twixt Cairo and Decan?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O may dark fancies err! They surely do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’T is ignorance that makes a barren waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all beyond itself. Thou dost bedew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Green rushes like our rivers, and dost taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pleasant sun-rise. Green isles hast thou too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the sea as happily dost haste.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-spenser" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To Spenser</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Spenser! a jealous honourer of thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A forester deep in thy midmost trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did last eve ask my promise to refine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some English that might strive thine ear to please.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Elfin Poet, ’t is impossible</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For an inhabitant of wintry earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rise like Phœbus with a golden quill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fire-wing’d and make a morning in his mirth.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-73"/>
					<span class="i1">It is impossible to escape from toil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’ the sudden and receive thy spiriting:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flower must drink the nature of the soil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before it can put forth its blossoming:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be with me in the summer days, and I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will for thine honour and his pleasure try.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="song-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Song<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="note-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></h3>
				<p>
					<span>Spirit here that reignest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirit here that painest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirit here that burnest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirit here that mournest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Spirit, I bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">My forehead low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enshaded with thy pinions.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Spirit, I look</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">All passion-struck</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into thy pale dominions.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Spirit here that laughest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirit here that quaffest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirit here that dancest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Noble soul that prancest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spirit, with thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I join in the glee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A-nudging the elbow of Momus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spirit, I flush</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a Bacchanal blush</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Just fresh from the Banquet of Comus.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-74"/>
			</article>
			<article id="fragment" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Fragment</h3>
				<blockquote class="TODO">
					<p>
						<span class="i3">Under the flag</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of each his faction, they to battle bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their embryo atoms.</span>
					</p>
					<footer>
						<p>Milton.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>
					<span>Welcome joy, and welcome sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lethe’s weed and Hermes’ feather;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come to-day, and come to-morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do love you both together!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I love to mark sad faces in fair weather;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hear a merry laugh amid the thunder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fair and foul I love together.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meadows sweet where flames are under,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a giggle at a wonder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Visage sage at pantomime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Funeral, and steeple-chime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Infant playing with a skull;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Morning fair, and shipwreck’d hull;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nightshade with the woodbine kissing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Serpents in red roses hissing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cleopatra regal-dress’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the aspic at her breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dancing music, music sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both together, sane and mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Muses bright, and muses pale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sombre Saturn, Momus hale;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laugh and sigh, and laugh again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, the sweetness of the pain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Muses bright and muses pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bare your faces of the veil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me see; and let me write</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the day, and of the night⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both together:⁠—let me slake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All my thirst for sweet heart-ache!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let my bower be of yew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Interwreath’d with myrtles new:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pines and lime-trees full in bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my couch a low grass-tomb.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-75"/>
			</article>
			<article id="what-the-thrush-said" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">What the Thrush Said</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O thou whose face hath felt the Winter’s wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose eye has seen the snow-clouds hung in mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the black elm tops ’mong the freezing stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee the spring will be a harvest-time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou, whose only book has been the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of supreme darkness which thou feddest on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Night after night when Phœbus was away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee the Spring shall be a triple morn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O fret not after knowledge⁠—I have none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet my song comes native with the warmth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O fret not after knowledge⁠—I have none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet the Evening listens. He who saddens</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At thought of idleness cannot be idle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he’s awake who thinks himself asleep.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="written-in-answer-to-a-sonnet-ending-thus" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Written in Answer to a Sonnet Ending Thus:⁠—</h3>
				<blockquote class="TODO">
					<p>
						<span>“Dark eyes are dearer far</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than those that mock the hyacinthine bell.”</span>
					</p>
					<footer>
						<p>By <abbr class="name">J. H.</abbr> Reynolds.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>
					<span>Blue! ’T is the life of heaven,⁠—the domain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Cynthia,⁠—the wide palace of the sun,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tent of Hesperus, and all his train⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bosomer of clouds, gold, gray, and dun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blue! ’T is the life of waters⁠—ocean</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all its vassal streams, pools numberless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May rage, and foam, and fret, but never can</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Subside, if not to dark blue nativeness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blue! Gentle cousin of the forest-green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Married to green in all the sweetest flowers,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forget-me-not,⁠—the blue bell,⁠—and, that queen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of secrecy, the violet: what strange powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou, as a mere shadow! But how great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in an Eye thou art, alive with fate!</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-76"/>
			</article>
			<article id="to-john-hamilton-reynolds" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To John Hamilton Reynolds</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O that a week could be an age, and we</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Felt parting and warm meeting every week;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then one poor year a thousand years would be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The flush of welcome ever on the cheek:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So could we live long life in little space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So time itself would be annihilate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So a day’s journey in oblivious haze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To serve our joys would lengthen and dilate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O to arrive each Monday morn from Ind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To land each Tuesday from the rich Levant!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In little time a host of joys to bind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keep our souls in one eternal pant!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This morn, my friend, and yester-evening taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me how to harbor such a happy thought.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-human-seasons" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Human Seasons</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Four Seasons fill the measure of the year;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There are four seasons in the mind of man:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has his lusty Spring, when fancy clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Takes in all beauty with an easy span:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has his Summer, when luxuriously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spring’s honied cud of youthful thought he loves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ruminate, and by such dreaming high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is nearest unto heaven: quiet coves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soul has in its Autumn, when his wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He furleth close; contented so to look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On mists in idleness⁠—to let fair things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pass by unheeded as a threshold brook.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has his Winter too of pale misfeature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else he would forego his mortal nature.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-77"/>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
