<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endymion</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="endymion" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endymion</h2>
			<blockquote class="TODO">
				<p>“The stretched metre of an antique song.”</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Shakspeare’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Sonnets</i>.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<section id="endymion-dedication" epub:type="dedication">
				<p>
					<span>Inscribed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with every feeling of pride and regret</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and with “a bowed mind”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to the memory of</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the most English of poets except Shakspeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thomas Chatterton</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="endymion-preface" epub:type="preface z3998:non-fiction">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Preface</h3>
				<p>Knowing within myself the manner in which this Poem has been produced, it is not without a feeling of regret that I make it public.</p>
				<p>What manner I mean, will be quite clear to the reader, who must soon perceive great inexperience, immaturity, and every error denoting a feverish attempt, rather than a deed accomplished. The two first books, and indeed the two last, I feel sensible are not of such completion as to warrant their passing the press; nor should they if I thought a year’s castigation would do them any good;⁠—it will not: the foundations are too sandy. It is just that this youngster should die away: a sad thought for me, if I had not some hope that while it is dwindling I may be plotting, and fitting myself for verses fit to live.</p>
				<p>This may be speaking too presumptuously, and may deserve a punishment: but no feeling man will be forward to inflict it: he will leave me alone, with the conviction that there is not a fiercer hell than the failure in a great object. This is not written with the least atom of purpose to forestall criticisms of course, but from the desire I have to conciliate men who are competent to look, and who do look with a zealous eye, to the honour of English literature.</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-78"/>
				<p>The imagination of a boy is healthy, and the mature imagination of a man is healthy; but there is a space of life between, in which the soul is in a ferment, the character undecided, the way of life uncertain, the ambition thick-sighted: thence proceeds mawkishness, and all the thousand bitters which those men I speak of must necessarily taste in going over the following pages.</p>
				<p>I hope I have not in too late a day touched the beautiful mythology of Greece, and dulled its brightness: for I wish to try once more, before I bid it farewell.</p>
				<footer>
					<p class="signature">Teignmouth, <time datetime="1818-04-10">April 10, 1818</time>.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
			<article id="endymion-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">A thing of beauty is a joy for ever:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its loveliness increases; it will never</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass into nothingness; but still will keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bower quiet for us, and a sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of sweet dreams, and health, and quiet breathing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore, on every morrow, are we wreathing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A flowery band to bind us to the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spite of despondence, of the inhuman dearth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of noble natures, of the gloomy days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the unhealthy and o’er-darken’d ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made for our searching: yes, in spite of all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some shape of beauty moves away the pall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From our dark spirits. Such the sun, the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trees old and young, sprouting a shady boon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For simple sheep; and such are daffodils</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the green world they live in; and clear rills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for themselves a cooling covert make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst the hot season; the mid-forest brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-79"/>
					<span>Rich with a sprinkling of fair musk-rose blooms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such too is the grandeur of the dooms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We have imagined for the mighty dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All lovely tales that we have heard or read:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An endless fountain of immortal drink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pouring unto us from the heaven’s brink.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Nor do we merely feel these essences</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one short hour; no, even as the trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That whisper round a temple become soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear as the temple’s self, so does the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The passion poesy, glories infinite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haunt us till they become a cheering light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto our souls, and bound to us so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, whether there be shine, or gloom o’ercast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They alway must be with us, or we die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Therefore ’t is with full happiness that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will trace the story of Endymion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very music of the name has gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into my being, and each pleasant scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is growing fresh before me as the green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of our own valleys: so I will begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now while I cannot hear the city’s din;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now while the early budders are just new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And run in mazes of the youngest hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About old forests; while the willow trails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its delicate amber; and the dairy pails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bring home increase of milk. And, as the year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grows lush in juicy stalks, I’ll smoothly steer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My little boat, for many quiet hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With streams that deepen freshly into bowers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many and many a verse I hope to write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the daisies, vermeil rimni’d and white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hide in deep herbage; and ere yet the bees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hum about globes of clover and sweet peas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must be near the middle of my story.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O may no wintry season, bare, and hoary,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-80"/>
					<span>See it half-finish’d: but let Autumn bold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With universal tinge of sober gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be all about me when I make an end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now at once, adventuresome, I send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My herald thought into a wilderness:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There let its trumpet blow, and quickly dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My uncertain path with green, that I may speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Easily onward, thorough flowers and weed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Upon the sides of Latmos was outspread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mighty forest: for the moist earth fed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So plenteously all weed-hidden roots</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into o’erhanging boughs, and precious fruits.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it had gloomy shades, sequestered deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where no man went; and if from shepherd’s keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lamb stray’d far a-down those inmost glens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never again saw he the happy pens</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither his brethren, bleating with content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the hills at every nightfall went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the shepherds, ’t was believed ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That not one fleecy lamb which thus did sever</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the white flock, but pass’d unworrièd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By angry wolf, or pard with prying head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until it came to some unfooted plains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where fed the herds of Pan: aye great his gains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who thus one lamb did lose. Paths there were many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Winding through palmy fern, and rushes fenny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ivy banks; all leading pleasantly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a wide lawn, whence one could only see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stems thronging all around between the swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of turf and slanting branches: who could tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The freshness of the space of heaven above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Edged round with dark tree-tops? through which a dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would often beat its wings, and often too</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little cloud would move across the blue.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-81"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Full in the middle of this pleasantness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There stood a marble altar, with a tress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flowers budded newly; and the dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had taken fairy phantasies to strew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daisies upon the sacred sward last eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so the dawned light in pomp receive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ’t was the morn: Apollo’s upward fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made every eastern cloud a silvery pyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of brightness so unsullied, that therein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A melancholy spirit well might win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oblivion, and melt out his essence fine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the winds: rain-scented eglantine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave temperate sweets to that well-wooing sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lark was lost in him; cold springs had run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To warm their chilliest bubbles in the grass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man’s voice was on the mountains; and the mass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of nature’s lives and wonders pulsed tenfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feel this sun-rise and its glories old.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Now while the silent workings of the dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were busiest, into that self-same lawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All suddenly, with joyful cries, there sped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A troop of little children garlanded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who gathering round the altar seem’d to pry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earnestly round as wishing to espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some folk of holiday: nor had they waited</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For many moments, ere their ears were sated</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a faint breath of music, which ev’n then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill’d out its voice, and died away again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within a little space again it gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its airy swellings, with a gentle wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To light-hung leaves, in smoothest echoes breaking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through copse-clad valleys,⁠—ere their death, o’er-taking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The surgy murmurs of the lonely sea.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And now, as deep into the wood as we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might mark a lynx’s eye, there glimmer’d light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair faces and a rush of garments white,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-82"/>
					<span>Plainer and plainer showing, till at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the widest alley they all past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making directly for the woodland altar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O kindly muse! let not my weak tongue faulter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In telling of this goodly company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their old piety, and of their glee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let a portion of ethereal dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall on my head, and presently unmew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul; that I may dare, in wayfaring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stammer where old Chaucer used to sing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Leading the way, young damsels danced along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing the burden of a shepherd song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each having a white wicker, overbrimm’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With April’s tender younglings: next, well trimm’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A crowd of shepherds with as sunburnt looks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As may be read of in Arcadian books;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as sat listening round Apollo’s pipe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the great deity, for earth too ripe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let his divinity o’erflowing die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In music, through the vales of Thessaly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some idly trail’d their sheep-hooks on the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some kept up a shrilly mellow sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ebon-tipped flutes: close after these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now coming from beneath the forest trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A venerable priest full soberly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begirt with minist’ring looks: alway his eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steadfast upon the matted turf he kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after him his sacred vestments swept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his right hand there swung a vase, milk-white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mingled wine, out-sparkling generous light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his left he held a basket full</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all sweet herbs that searching eye could cull:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wild thyme, and valley-lilies whiter still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Leda’s love, and cresses from the rill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His aged head, crowned with beechen wreath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem’d like a poll of ivy in the teeth</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-83"/>
					<span>Of winter hoar. Then came another crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of shepherds, lifting in due time aloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their share of the ditty. After them appear’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up-follow’d by a multitude that rear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their voices to the clouds, a fair-wrought car,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Easily rolling so as scarce to mar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The freedom of three steeds of dapple brown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who stood therein did seem of great renown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the throng. His youth was fully blown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showing like Ganymede to manhood grown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for those simple times, his garments were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A chieftain king’s; beneath his breast, half bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was hung a silver bugle, and between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His nervy knees there lay a boar-spear keen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A smile was on his countenance; he seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To common lookers-on, like one who dream’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of idleness in groves Elysian:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there were some who feelingly could scan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lurking trouble in his nether lip.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And see that oftentimes the reins would slip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through his forgotten hands: then would they sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And think of yellow leaves, of owlets’ cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of logs piled solemnly. — Ah, well-a-day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should our young Endymion pine away!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Soon the assembly, in a circle ranged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood silent round the shrine: each look was changed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sudden veneration: women meek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beckon’d their sons to silence; while each cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of virgin bloom paled gently for slight fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion too, without a forest peer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood, wan, and pale, and with an awed face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among his brothers of the mountain chase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In midst of all, the venerable priest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eyed them with joy from greatest to the least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after lifting up his aged hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus spake he: “Men of Latmos! shepherd bands!</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-84"/>
					<span>Whose care it is to guard a thousand flocks:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether descended from beneath the rocks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That overtop your mountains; whether come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From valleys where the pipe is never dumb;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or from your swelling downs, where sweet air stirs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blue harebells lightly, and where prickly furze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Buds lavish gold; or ye, whose precious charge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nibble their fill at ocean’s very marge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose mellow reeds are touch’d with sounds forlorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the dim echoes of old Triton’s horn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mothers and wives! who day by day prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scrip, with needments, for the mountain air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all ye gentle girls who foster up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Udderless lambs, and in a little cup</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will put choice honey for a favour’d youth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, every one attend! for in good truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our vows are wanting to our great god Pan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are not our lowing heifers sleeker than</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Night-swollen mushrooms? Are not our wide plains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speckled with countless fleeces? Have not rains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Green’d over April’s lap? No howling sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sickens our fearful ewes; and we have had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great bounty from Endymion our lord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth is glad: the merry lark has pour’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His early song against yon breezy sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That spreads so clear o’er our solemnity.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thus ending, on the shrine he heap’d a spire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of teeming sweets, enkindling sacred fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon he stain’d the thick and spongy sod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wine, in honour of the shepherd-god.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now while the earth was drinking it, and while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bay leaves were crackling in the fragrant pile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gummy frankincense was sparkling bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Neath smothering parsley, and a hazy light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spread grayly eastward, thus a chorus sang:</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-85"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“O thou, whose mighty palace roof doth hang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From jagged trunks, and overshadoweth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternal whispers, glooms, the birth, life, death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of unseen flowers in heavy peacefulness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lov’st to see the hamadryads dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ruffled locks where meeting hazels darken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through whole solemn hours dost sit, and hearken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dreary melody of bedded reeds⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In desolate places, where dank moisture breeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pipy hemlock to strange overgrowth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bethinking thee, how melancholy loth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wast to lose fair Syrinx⁠—do thou now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thy love’s milky brow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all the trembling mazes that she ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear us, great Pan!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“O thou, for whose soul-soothing quiet, turtles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passion their voices cooingly ’mong myrtles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time thou wanderest at eventide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through sunny meadows, that outskirt the side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thine enmossed realms: O thou, to whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broad-leaved fig-trees even now foredoom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ripen’d fruitage; yellow-girted bees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their golden honeycombs; our village leas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their fairest blossom’d beans and poppied corn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chuckling linnet its five young unborn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sing for thee; low-creeping strawberries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their summer coolness; pent-up butterflies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their freckled wings; yea, the fresh budding year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All its completions⁠—be quickly near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By every wind that nods the mountain pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O forester divine!</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-86"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Thou, to whom every faun and satyr flies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For willing service; whether to surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The squatted hare while in half-sleeping fit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or upward ragged precipices flit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To save poor lambkins from the eagle’s maw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or by mysterious enticement draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bewilder’d shepherds to their path again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to tread breathless round the frothy main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gather up all fancifullest shells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thee to tumble into Naiads’ cells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, being hidden, laugh at their out-peeping;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to delight thee with fantastic leaping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The while they pelt each other on the crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With silvery oak-apples, and fir-cones brown⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all the echoes that about thee ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear us, O satyr king!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“O Hearkener to the loud-clapping shears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While ever and anon to his shorn peers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A ram goes bleating: Winder of the horn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When snouted wild-boars routing tender corn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anger our huntsman: Breather round our farms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep off mildews, and all weather harms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange ministrant of undescribed sounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That come a-swooning over hollow grounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wither drearily on barren moors:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dread opener of the mysterious doors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leading to universal knowledge⁠—see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great son of Dryope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The many that are come to pay their vows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With leaves about their brows!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Be still the unimaginable lodge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For solitary thinkings; such as dodge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conception to the very bourne of heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then leave the naked brain: be still the leaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That spreading in this dull and clodded earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gives it a touch ethereal⁠—a new birth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be still a symbol of immensity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A firmament reflected in a sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An element filling the space between;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An unknown⁠—but no more: we humbly screen</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-87"/>
					<span>With uplift hands our foreheads, lowly bending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And giving out a shout most heaven-rending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conjure thee to receive our humble Pæan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon thy Mount Lycean!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Even while they brought the burden to a close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shout from the whole multitude arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That linger’d in the air like dying rolls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of abrupt thunder, when Ionian shoals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dolphins bob their noses through the brine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime, on shady levels, mossy fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young companies nimbly began dancing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the swift treble pipe, and humming string.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, those fair living forms swam heavenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tunes forgotten⁠—out of memory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair creatures! whose young children’s children bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thermopylæ its heroes⁠—not yet dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in old marbles ever beautiful.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High genitors, unconscious did they cull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time’s sweet first-fruits⁠—they danced to weariness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then in quiet circles did they press</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hillock turf, and caught the latter end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some strange history, potent to send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A young mind from its bodily tenement.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or they might watch the quoit-pitchers, intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On either side; pitying the sad death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hyacinthus, when the cruel breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Zephyr slew him,⁠—Zephyr penitent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who now, ere Phœbus mounts the firmament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fondles the flower amid the sobbing rain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The archers too, upon a wider plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the feathery whizzing of the shaft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the dull twanging bowstring, and the raft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Branch down sweeping from a tall ash top</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call’d up a thousand thoughts to envelope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those who would watch. Perhaps, the trembling knee</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-88"/>
					<span>And frantic gape of lonely Niobe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor, lonely Niobe! when her lovely young</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were dead and gone, and her caressing tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay a lost thing upon her paly lip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And very, very deadliness did nip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her motherly cheeks. Aroused from this sad mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By one, who at a distance loud halloo’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uplifting his strong bow into the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many might after brighter visions stare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the Argonauts, in blind amaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tossing about on Neptune’s restless ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until, from the horizon’s vaulted side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There shot a golden splendour far and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spangling those million poutings of the brine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With quivering ore: ’t was even an awful shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the exaltation of Apollo’s bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A heavenly beacon in their dreary woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who thus were ripe for high contemplating,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might turn their steps towards the sober ring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where sat Endymion and the aged priest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mong shepherds gone in eld, whose looks increased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silvery setting of their mortal star.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There they discoursed upon the fragile bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That keeps us from our homes ethereal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what our duties there: to nightly call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vesper, the beauty-crest of summer weather;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To summon all the downiest clouds together</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the sun’s purple couch; to emulate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In minist’ring the potent rule of fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With speed of fire-tail’d exhalations;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tint her pallid cheek with bloom, who cons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet poesy by moonlight: besides these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A world of other unguess’d offices.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon they wander’d, by divine converse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into Elysium; vying to rehearse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each one his own anticipated bliss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One felt heart-certain that he could not miss</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-89"/>
					<span>His quick-gone love, among fair blossom’d boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where every zephyr-sigh pouts, and endows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her lips with music for the welcoming.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another wish’d, ’mid that eternal spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet his rosy child, with feathery sails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweeping, eye-earnestly, through almond vales:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, suddenly, should stoop through the smooth wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the balmiest leaves his temples bind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, ever after, through those regions be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His messenger, his little Mercury.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some were athirst in soul to see again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their fellow-huntsmen o’er the wide champaign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In times long past; to sit with them, and talk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the chances in their earthly walk;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comparing, joyfully, their plenteous stores</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happiness, to when upon the moors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Benighted, close they huddled from the cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shared their famish’d scrips. Thus all out-told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their fond imaginations,⁠—saving him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose eyelids curtain’d up their jewels dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion: yet hourly had he striven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hide the cankering venom, that had riven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fainting recollections. Now indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His senses had swoon’d off: he did not heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sudden silence, or the whispers low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the old eyes dissolving at his woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or anxious calls, or close of trembling palms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or maiden’s sigh, that grief itself embalms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the self-same fixed trance he kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one who on the earth had never stept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, even as dead-still as a marble man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frozen in that old tale Arabian.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Who whispers him so pantingly and close?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona, his sweet sister: of all those,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His friends, the dearest. Hushing signs she made,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-90"/>
					<span>And breathed a sister’s sorrow to persuade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A yielding up, a cradling on her care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eloquence did breathe away the curse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She led him, like some midnight spirit nurse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happy changes in emphatic dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along a path between two little streams,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guarding his forehead, with her round elbow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From low-grown branches, and his footsteps slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From stumbling over stumps and hillocks small;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until they came to where these streamlets fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mingled bubblings and a gentle rush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a river, clear, brimful, and flush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With crystal mocking of the trees and sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little shallop, floating there hard by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pointed its beak over the fringed bank;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon it lightly dipt, and rose, and sank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dipt again, with the young couple’s weight,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona guiding, through the water straight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards a bowery island opposite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which gaining presently, she steered light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a shady, fresh, and ripply cove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where nested was an arbour, overwove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By many a summer’s silent fingering;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whose cool bosom she was used to bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her playmates, with their needle broidery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And minstrel memories of times gone by.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So she was gently glad to see him laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under her favourite bower’s quiet shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On her own couch, new made of flower leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dried carefully on the cooler side of sheaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When last the sun his autumn tresses shook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the tann’d harvesters rich armfuls took.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon was he quieted to slumbrous rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, ere it crept upon him, he had prest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona’s busy hand against his lips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still, a-sleeping, held her finger-tips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tender pressure. And as a willow keeps</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-91"/>
					<span>A patient watch over the stream that creeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Windingly by it, so the quiet maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Held her in peace: so that a whispering blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of grass, a wailful gnat, a bee bustling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down in the bluebells, or a wren light rustling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among sere leaves and twigs, might all be heard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O magic sleep! O comfortable bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That broodest o’er the troubled sea of the mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it is hush’d and smooth! O unconfined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Restraint! imprison’d liberty! great key</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To golden palaces, strange minstrelsy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fountains grotesque, new trees, bespangled caves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Echoing grottoes, full of tumbling waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And moonlight; aye, to all the mazy world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of silvery enchantment!⁠—who, upfurl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath thy drowsy wing a triple hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But renovates and lives?⁠—Thus, in the bower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion was calm’d to life again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opening his eyelids with a healthier brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said: “I feel this thine endearing love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All through my bosom: thou art as a dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembling its closed eyes and sleeked wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About me; and the pearliest dew not brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such morning incense from the fields of May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As do those brighter drops that twinkling stray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From those kind eyes⁠—the very home and haunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sisterly affection. Can I want</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aught else, aught nearer heaven, than such tears?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet dry them up, in bidding hence all fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, any longer, I will pass my days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone and sad. No, I will once more raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My voice upon the mountain-heights; once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make my horn parley from their foreheads hoar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again my trooping hounds their tongues shall loll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around the breathed boar: again I’ll poll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair-grown yew-tree, for a chosen bow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when the pleasant sun is getting low,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-92"/>
					<span>Again I’ll linger in a sloping mead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear the speckled thrushes, and see feed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our idle sheep. So be thou cheered, sweet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if thy lute is here, softly intreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul to keep in its resolved course.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Hereat Peona, in their silver source,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shut her pure sorrow-drops with glad exclaim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And took a lute, from which there pulsing came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lively prelude, fashioning the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which her voice should wander. ’T was a lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More subtle cadenced, more forest wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Dryope’s lone lulling of her child;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing since has floated in the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So mournful strange. Surely some influence rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went, spiritual, through the damsel’s hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For still, with Delphic emphasis, she spann’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The quick invisible strings, even though she saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion’s spirit melt away and thaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the deep intoxication.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon she came, with sudden burst, upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her self-possession⁠—swung the lute aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And earnestly said: “Brother, ’tis vain to hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou dost know of things mysterious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immortal, starry; such alone could thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weigh down thy nature. Hast thou sinn’d in aught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Offensive to the heavenly powers? Caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Paphian dove upon a message sent? </span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy deathful bow against some deer-herd bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sacred to Dian? Haply, thou hast seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her naked limbs among the alders green;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that, alas! is death! No, I can trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Something more high perplexing in thy face!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Endymion look’d at her, and press’d her hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “Art thou so pale, who wast so bland</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And merry in our meadows? How is this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me thine ailment: tell me all amiss!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-93"/>
					<span>Ah! thou hast been unhappy at the change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrought suddenly in me. What indeed more strange?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or more complete to overwhelm surmise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ambition is no sluggard: ’t is no prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That toiling years would put within my grasp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I have sigh’d for: with so deadly gasp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No man e’er panted for a mortal love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So all have set my heavier grief above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things which happen. Rightly have they done:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, who still saw the horizontal sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heave his broad shoulder o’er the edge of the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out-facing Lucifer, and then had hurl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My spear aloft, as signal for the chase⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, who, for very sport of heart, would race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With my own steed from Araby; pluck down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vulture from his towery perching; frown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lion into growling, loth retire⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lose, at once, all my toil-breeding fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sink thus low! but I will ease my breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of secret grief, here in this bowery nest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“This river does not see the naked sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it begins to progress silverly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around the western border of the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence, from a certain spot, its winding flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seems at the distance like a crescent moon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in that nook, the very pride of June,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had I been used to pass my weary eves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rather for the sun unwilling leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So dear a picture of his sovereign power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I could witness his most kingly hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he doth tighten up the golden reins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And paces leisurely down amber plains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His snorting four. Now when his chariot last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its beams against the zodiac-lion cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-94"/>
					<span>There blossom’d suddenly a magic bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sacred ditamy, and poppies red:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which I wondered greatly, knowing well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That but one night had wrought this flowery spell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, sitting down close by, began to muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What it might mean. Perhaps, thought I, Morpheus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In passing here, his owlet pinions shook;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, it may be, ere matron Night uptook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her ebon urn, young Mercury, by stealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had dipt his rod in it: such garland wealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came not by common growth. Thus on I thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until my head was dizzy and distraught.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moreover, through the dancing poppies stole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A breeze, most softly lulling to my soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shaping visions all about my sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of colours, wings, and bursts of spangly light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which became more strange, and strange, and dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then were gulf’d in a tumultuous swim:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then I fell asleep. Ah, can I tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The enchantment that afterwards befell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet it was but a dream: yet such a dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never tongue, although it overteem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mellow utterance, like a cavern spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could figure out and to conception bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All I beheld and felt. Methought I lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watching the zenith, where the milky way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the stars in virgin splendour pours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And travelling my eye, until the doors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven appear’d to open for my flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I became loth and fearful to alight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From such high soaring by a downward glance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So kept me steadfast in that airy trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spreading imaginary pinions wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, presently, the stars began to glide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And faint away, before my eager view:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which I sigh’d that I could not pursue,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-95"/>
					<span>And dropt my vision to the horizon’s verge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! from opening clouds, I saw emerge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The loveliest moon, that ever silver’d o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shell for Neptune’s goblet; she did soar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So passionately bright, my dazzled soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commingling with her argent spheres did roll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through clear and cloudy, even when she went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last into a dark and vapoury tent⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat, methought, the lidless-eyed train</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of planets all were in the blue again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To commune with those orbs, once more I raised</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sight right upward: but it was quite dazed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a bright something, sailing down apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making me quickly veil my eyes and face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again I look’d, and, O ye deities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who from Olympus watch our destinies!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence that completed form of all completeness?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence came that high perfection of all sweetness?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speak, stubborn earth, and tell me where, O where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou a symbol of her golden hair?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not oat-sheaves drooping in the western sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not⁠—thy soft hand, fair sister! let me shun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such follying before thee⁠—yet she had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indeed, locks bright enough to make me mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they were simply gordian’d up and braided,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving, in naked comeliness, unshaded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her pearl round ears, white neck, and orbed brow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which were blended in, I know not how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a paradise of lips and eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blush-tinted cheeks, half-smiles, and faintest sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, when I think thereon, my spirit clings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plays about its fancy, till the stings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of human neighbourhood envenom all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto what awful power shall I call?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what high fane?⁠—Ah! see her hovering feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More bluely vein’d, more soft, more whitely sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than those of sea-born Venus, when she rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out her cradle shell. The wind out-blows</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-96"/>
					<span>Her scarf into a fluttering pavilion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is blue, and over-spangled with a million</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of little eyes, as though thou wert to shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the darkest, lushest bluebell bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Handfuls of daisies.”⁠—“Endymion, how strange!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dream within dream!”⁠—“She took an airy range,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, towards me, like a very maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came blushing, waning, willing, and afraid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And press’d me by the hand: Ah! ’t was too much;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methought I fainted at the charmed touch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet held my recollection, even as one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dives three fathoms where the waters run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gurgling in beds of coral: for anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I felt upmounted in that region</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where falling stars dart their artillery forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eagles struggle with the buffeting north</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That balances the heavy meteor-stone;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt too, I was not fearful, nor alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lapp’d and lull’d along the dangerous sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon, as it seem’d, we left our journeying high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And straightway into frightful eddies swoop’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as ay muster where gray time has scoop’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Huge dens and caverns in a mountain’s side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There hollow sounds aroused me, and I sigh’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To faint once more by looking on my bliss⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was distracted; madly did I kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wooing arms which held me, and did give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My eyes at once to death: but ’t was to live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take in draughts of life from the gold fount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of kind and passionate looks; to count, and count</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moments, by some greedy help that seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A second self, that each might be redeem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plunder’d of its load of blessedness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, desperate mortal! I ev’n dared to press</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her very cheek against my crowned lip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, at that moment, felt my body dip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a warmer air: a moment more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our feet were soft in flowers. There was store</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-97"/>
					<span>Of newest joys upon that alp. Sometimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A scent of violets, and blossoming limes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loiter’d around us; then of honey cells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made delicate from all white-flower bells;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once, above the edges of our nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An arch face peep’d,⁠—an Oread as I guess’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Why did I dream that sleep o’erpower’d me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In midst of all this heaven? Why not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far off, the shadows of his pinions dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stare them from me? But no, like a spark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That needs must die, although its little beam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reflects upon a diamond, my sweet dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell into nothing⁠—into stupid sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so it was, until a gentle creep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A careful moving caught my waking ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up I started: Ah! my sighs, my tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My clenched hands;⁠—for lo! the poppies hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dew-dabbled on their stalks, the ouzel sung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A heavy ditty, and the sullen day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had chidden herald Hesperus away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With leaden looks: the solitary breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bluster’d, and slept, and its wild self did tease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wayward melancholy; and I thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark me, Peona! that sometimes it brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint fare-thee-wells, and sigh-shrillcd adieus!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away I wander’d⁠—all the pleasant hues</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven and earth had faded: deepest shades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were deepest dungeons; heaths and sunny glades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were full of pestilent light; our taintless rills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem’d sooty, and o’erspread with upturn’d gills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dying fish; the vermeil rose had blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In frightful scarlet, and its thorns outgrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like spiked aloe. If an innocent bird</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before my heedless footsteps stirr’d, and stirr’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In little journeys, I beheld in it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A disguised demon, missioned to knit</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-98"/>
					<span>My soul with under darkness; to entice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My stumblings down some monstrous precipice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I eager follow’d, and did curse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The disappointment. Time, that aged nurse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rock’d me to patience. Now, thank gentle heaven!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things, with all their comfortings, are given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my down-sunken hours, and with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet sister, help to stem the ebbing sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of weary life.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Thus ended he, and both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat silent: for the maid was very loth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To answer; feeling well that breathed words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would all be lost, unheard, and vain as swords</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the enchased crocodile, or leaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of grasshoppers against the sun. She weeps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wonders; struggles to devise some blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To put on such a look as would say, <em>Shame</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>On this poor weakness!</em> but, for all her strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She could as soon have crush’d away the life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From a sick dove. At length, to break the pause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She said with trembling chance: “Is this the cause?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This all? Yet it is strange, and sad, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one who through this middle earth should pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most like a sojourning demi-god, and leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His name upon the harp-string, should achieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No higher bard than simple maidenhood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singing alone, and fearfully,⁠—how the blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left his young cheek; and how he used to stray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew not where; and how he would say, <em>nay</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any said ’t was love: and yet ’t was love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What could it be but love? How a ringdove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let fall a sprig of yew-tree in his path;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how he died: and then, that love doth scathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gentle heart, as northern blasts do roses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the ballad of his sad life closes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sighs, and an alas!⁠—Endymion!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be rather in the trumpet’s mouth,⁠—anon</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-99"/>
					<span>Among the winds at large⁠—that all may hearken!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although, before the crystal heavens darken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I watch and dote upon the silver lakes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pictured in western cloudiness, that takes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The semblance of gold rocks and bright gold sands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Islands, and creeks, and amber-fretted strands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With horses prancing o’er them, palaces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And towers of amethyst,⁠—would I so tease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My pleasant days, because I could not mount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into those regions? The Morphean fount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that fine element that visions, dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fitful whims of sleep are made of, streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into its airy channels with so subtle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thin a breathing, not the spider’s shuttle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Circled a million times within the space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a swallow’s nest-door, could delay a trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tinting of its quality: how light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must dreams themselves be; seeing they’re more slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the mere nothing that engenders them!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then wherefore sully the entrusted gem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of high and noble life with thoughts so sick?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why pierce high-fronted honour to the quick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For nothing but a dream?” Hereat the youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look’d up: a conflicting of shame and ruth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was in his plaited brow: yet his eyelids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Widen’d a little, as when Zephyr bids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little breeze to creep between the fans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of careless butterflies: amid his pains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seem’d to taste a drop of manna-dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full palatable; and a colour grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his cheek, while thus he lifeful spake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Peona! ever have I long’d to slake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My thirst for the world’s praises: nothing base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No merely slumberous phantasm, could unlace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stubborn canvas for my voyage prepared⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though now ’t is tatter’d; leaving my bark bared</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-100"/>
					<span>And sullenly drifting: yet my higher hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is of too wide, too rainbow-large a scope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fret at myriads of earthly wrecks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein lies happiness? In that which becks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our ready minds to fellowship divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fellowship with essence; till we shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full alchemized, and free of space. Behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clear religion of heaven! Fold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rose leaf round thy finger’s taperness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soothe thy lips: hist, when the airy stress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of music’s kiss impregnates the free winds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a sympathetic touch unbinds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Æolian magic from their lucid wombs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then old songs waken from enclouded tombs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old ditties sigh above their father’s grave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ghosts of melodious prophesyings rave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round every spot where trod Apollo’s foot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bronze clarions awake, and faintly bruit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where long ago a giant battle was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, from the turf, a lullaby doth pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every place where infant Orpheus slept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feel we these things?⁠—that moment have we stept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a sort of oneness, and our state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is like a floating spirit’s. But there are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Richer entanglements, enthralments far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More self-destroying, leading, by degrees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the chief intensity: the crown of these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is made of love and friendship, and sits high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the forehead of humanity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All its more ponderous and bulky worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is friendship, whence there ever issues forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A steady splendour; but at the tip-top,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There hangs by unseen film, an orbed drop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of light, and that is love: its influence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrown in our eyes genders a novel sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which we start and fret: till in the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melting into its radiance, we blend,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-101"/>
					<span>Mingle, and so become a part of it,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor with aught else can our souls interknit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wingedly: when we combine therewith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life’s self is nourish’d by its proper pith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we are nurtured like a pelican brood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, so delicious is the unsating food.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That men, who might have tower’d in the van</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the congregated world, to fan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And winnow from the coming step of time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All chaff of custom, wipe away all slime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left by men-slugs and human serpentry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have been content to let occasion die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst they did sleep in love’s Elysium.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, truly, I would rather be struck dumb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than speak against this ardent listlessness:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I have ever thought that it might bless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world with benefits unknowingly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As does the nightingale, up-perched high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cloister’d among cool and bunched leaves⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sings but to her love, nor e’er conceives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How tiptoe Night holds back her dark-gray hood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just so may love, although ’t is understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mere commingling of passionate breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Produce more than our searching witnesseth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What I know not: but who, of men, can tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That flowers would bloom, or that green fruit would swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To melting pulp, that fish would have bright mail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth its dower of river, wood, and vale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The meadows runnels, runnels pebble-stones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seed its harvest, or the lute its tones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tones ravishment, or ravishment its sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If human souls did never kiss and greet?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Now, if this earthly love has power to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men’s being mortal, immortal; to shake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ambition from their memories, and brim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their measure of content: what merest whim,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-102"/>
					<span>Seems all this poor endeavour after fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To one, who keeps within his steadfast aim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A love immortal, an immortal too.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look not so wilder’d; for these things are true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never can be born of atomies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That buzz about our slumbers, like brain-flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving us fancy-sick, No, no, I’m sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My restless spirit never could endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To brood so long upon one luxury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless it did, though fearfully, espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hope beyond the shadow of a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sayings will the less obscured seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I have told thee how my waking sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has made me scruple whether that same night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was pass’d in dreaming. Hearken, sweet Peona!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the matron-temple of Latona,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which we should see but for these darkening boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies a deep hollow, from whose ragged brows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bushes and trees do lean all round athwart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And meet so nearly, that with wings outraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spreaded tail, a vulture could not glide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past them, but he must brush on every side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some moulder’d steps lead into this cool cell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far as the slabbed margin of a well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose patient level peeps its crystal eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right upward, through the bushes, to the sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft have I brought thee flowers, on their stalks set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like vestal primroses, but dark velvet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Edges them round, and they have golden pits:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T was there I got them, from the gaps and slits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a mossy stone, that sometimes was my seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all above was faint with mid-day heat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there in strife no burning thoughts to heed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’d bubble up the water through a reed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So reaching back to boyhood: make me ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of moulted feathers, touchwood, alder chips,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-103"/>
					<span>With leaves stuck in them; and the Neptune be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their petty ocean. Oftener, heavily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When lovelorn hours had left me less a child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sat contemplating the figures wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of o’erhead clouds melting the mirror through.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a day, while thus I watch’d, by flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cloudy Cupid, with his bow and quiver;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So plainly character’d, no breeze would shiver</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The happy chance: so happy, I was fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To follow it upon the open plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, therefore, was just going; when, behold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wonder, fair as any I have told⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same bright face I tasted in my sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiling in the clear well. My heart did leap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the cool depth.⁠—It moved as if to flee⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I started up, when lo! refreshfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came upon my face, in plenteous showers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dew-drops, and dewy buds, and leaves, and flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrapping all objects from my smother’d sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bathing my spirit in a new delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, such a breathless honey-feel of bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone preserved me from the drear abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of death, for the fair form had gone again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasure is oft a visitant; but pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clings cruelly to us, like the gnawing sloth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the deer’s tender haunches: late, and loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is scared away by slow returning pleasure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How sickening, how dark the dreadful leisure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of weary days, made deeper exquisite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a foreknowledge of unslumbrous night!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like sorrow came upon me, heavier still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than when I wander’d from the poppy hill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a whole age of lingering moments crept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sluggishly by, ere more contentment swept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away at once the deadly yellow spleen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, thrice have I this fair enchantment seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once more been tortured with renewed life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When last the wintry gusts gave over strife</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-104"/>
					<span>With the conquering sun of spring, and left the skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm and serene, but yet with moisten’d eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pity of the shatter’d infant buds,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That time thou didst adorn, with amber studs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My hunting cap, because I laugh’d and smiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chatted with thee, and many days exiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All torment from my breast;⁠—’t was even then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straying about, yet coop’d up in the den</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of helpless discontent,⁠—hurling my lance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From place to place, and following at chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last, by hap, through some young trees it struck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, plashing among bedded pebbles, stuck</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the middle of a brook,⁠—whose silver ramble</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down twenty little falls through reeds and bramble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tracing along, it brought me to a cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence it ran brightly forth, and white did lave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nether sides of mossy stones and rock,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mong which it gurgled blithe adieus, to mock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its own sweet grief at parting. Overhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung a lush screen of drooping weeds, and spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thick, as to curtain up some wood-nymph’s home.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Ah! impious mortal, whither do I roam!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said I, low-voiced: ‘Ah, whither! ’Tis the grot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Proserpine, when Hell, obscure and hot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth her resign; and where her tender hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She dabbles, on the cool and sluicy sands:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ’t is the cell of Echo, where she sits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And babbles thorough silence, till her wits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are gone in tender madness, and anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faints into sleep, with many a dying tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sadness. O that she would take my vows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breathe them sighingly among the boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sue her gentle ears for whose fair head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daily, I pluck sweet flowerets from their bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And weave them dyingly⁠—send honey-whispers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round every leaf, that all those gentle lispers</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-105"/>
					<span>May sigh my love unto her pitying!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O charitable Echo! hear, and sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This ditty to her!⁠—tell her’⁠—So I stay’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My foolish tongue, and listening, half afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood stupefied with my own empty folly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blushing for the freaks of melancholy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Salt tears were coming, when I heard my name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most fondly lipp’d, and then these accents came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Endymion! the cave is secreter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the isle of Delos. Echo hence shall stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sighs but sigh-warm kisses, or light noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy combing hand, the while it travelling cloys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trembles through my labyrinthine hair.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At that oppress’d, I hurried in.⁠—Ah! where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are those swift moments? Whither are they fled?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll smile no more, Peona; nor will wed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sorrow, the way to death; but patiently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bear up against it: so farewell, sad sigh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And come instead demurest meditation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To occupy me wholly, and to fashion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My pilgrimage for the world’s dusky brink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ko more will I count over, link by link,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My chain of grief: no longer strive to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A half-forgetfulness in mountain wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blustering about my ears: aye, thou shalt see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dearest of sisters, what my life shall be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What a calm round of hours shall make my days.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a paly flame of hope that plays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where’er I look; but yet, I’ll say ’t is naught⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here I bid it die. Have not I caught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already, a more healthy countenance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By this the sun is setting; we may chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meet some of our near-dwellers with my car.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">This said, he rose, faint-smiling like a star</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through autumn mists, and took Peona’s hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stept into the boat, and launch’d from land.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-106"/>
			</article>
			<article id="endymion-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O sovereign power of love! O grief! O balm!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All records, saving thine, come cool, and calm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shadowy, through the mist of passed years:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For others, good or bad, hatred and tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have become indolent; but touching thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One sigh doth echo, one poor sob doth pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One kiss brings honey-dew from buried days.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The woes of Troy, towers smothering o’er their blaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stiff-holden shields, far-piercing spears, keen blades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struggling, and blood, and’ shrieks⁠—all dimly fades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into some backward corner of the brain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, in our very souls, we feel amain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The close of Troïlus and Cressid sweet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence, pageant history! hence, gilded cheat!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swart planet in the universe of deeds!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide sea, that one continuous murmur breeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the pebbled shore of memory!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many old rotten-timber’d boats there be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon thy vaporous bosom, magnified</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To goodly vessels; many a sail of pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And golden-keel’d, is left unlaunch’d and dry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wherefore this? What care, though owl did fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the great Athenian admiral’s mast?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What care, though striding Alexander past</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Indus with his Macedonian numbers?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though old Ulysses tortured from his slumbers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glutted Cyclops, what care?⁠—Juliet leaning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid her window-flowers,⁠—sighing,⁠—weaning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tenderly her fancy from its maiden snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth more avail than these; the silver flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hero’s tears, the swoon of Imogen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair Pastorella in the bandit’s den,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-107"/>
					<span>Are things to brood on with more ardency</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the death-day of empires. Fearfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must such conviction come upon his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, thus far, discontent, has dared to tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without one muse’s smile, or kind behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The path of love and poesy. But rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In chafing restlessness, is yet more drear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than to be crush’d, in striving to uprear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s standard on the battlements of song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So once more days and nights aid me along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like legion’d soldiers.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Brain-sick shepherd-prince,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What promise hast thou faithful guarded since</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day of sacrifice? Or, have new sorrows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come with the constant dawn upon thy morrows?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! ’t is his old grief. For many days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has he been wandering in uncertain ways:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through wilderness, and woods of mossed oaks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Counting his woe-worn minutes, by the strokes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the lone wood-cutter; and listening still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hour after hour, to each lush-leaved rill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now he is sitting by a shady spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And elbow-deep with feverous fingering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stems the upbursting cold: a wild rose tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pavilions him in bloom, and he doth see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bud which snares his fancy: lo! but now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He plucks it, dips its stalk in the water: how!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It swells, it buds, it flowers beneath his sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in the middle, there is softly pight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A golden butterfly; upon whose wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There must be surely character’d strange things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with wide eye he wonders, and smiles oft.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Lightly this little herald flew aloft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow’d by glad Endymion’s clasped hands:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward it flies. From languor’s sullen bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His limbs are loosed, and eager, on he hies</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-108"/>
					<span>Dazzled to trace it in the sunny skies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seem’d lie flew, the way so easy was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like a new-born spirit did he pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the green evening quiet in the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er many a heath, through many a woodland dun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through buried paths, where sleepy twilight dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The summer time away. One track unseams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wooded cleft, and, far away, the blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ocean fades upon him; then, anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sinks adown a solitary glen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where there was never sound of mortal men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saving, perhaps, some snow-light cadences</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melting to silence, when upon the breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some holy bark let forth an anthem sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cheer itself to Delphi. Still his feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went swift beneath the merry-winged guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until it reach’d a splashing fountain’s side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, near a cavern’s mouth, for ever pour’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the temperate air: then high it soar’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, downward, suddenly began to dip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if, athirst with so much toil, ’t would sip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crystal spout-head: so it did, with touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most delicate, as though afraid to smutch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even with mealy gold, the waters clear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, at that very touch, to disappear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fairy-quick, was strange! Bewildered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion sought around, and shook each bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of covert flowers in vain; and then he flung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself along the grass. What gentle tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What whisperer, disturb’d his gloomy rest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a nymph uprisen to the breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the fountain’s pebbly margin, and she stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mong lilies, like the youngest of the brood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him her dripping hand she softly kist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And anxiously began to plait and twist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her ringlets round her fingers, saying: “Youth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too long, alas, hast thou starved on the ruth,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-109"/>
					<span>The bitterness of love: too long indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing thou art so gentle. Could I weed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul of care, by heavens, I would offer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the bright riches of my crystal coffer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Amphitrite; all my clear-eyed fish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Golden, or rainbow-sided, or purplish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vermilion-tail’d, or finn’d with silvery gauze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, or my veined pebble-floor, that draws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A virgin light to the deep; my grotto-sands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tawny and gold, oozed slowly from far lands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By my diligent springs: my level lilies, shells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My charming rod, my potent river spells;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, every thing, even to the pearly cup</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meander gave me,⁠—for I bubbled up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fainting creatures in a desert wild.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But woe is me, I am but as a child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gladden thee; and all I dare to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is, that I pity thee; that on this day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve been thy guide; that thou must wander far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In other regions, past the scanty bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mortal steps, before thou canst be ta’en</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From every wasting sigh, from every pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the gentle bosom of thy love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why it is thus, one knows in heaven above:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, a poor Naiad, I guess not. Farewell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have a ditty for my hollow cell.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Hereat she vanish’d from Endymion’s gaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who brooded o’er the water in amaze:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dashing fount pour’d on, and where its pool</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay, half asleep, in grass and rushes cool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quick waterflies and gnats were sporting still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fish were dimpling, as if good nor ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had fallen out that hour. The wanderer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holding his forehead to keep off the burr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of smothering fancies, patiently sat down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, while beneath the evening’s sleepy frown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glowworms began to trim their starry lamps,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-110"/>
					<span>Thus breathed he to himself: “Whoso encamps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take a fancied city of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O what a wretch is he! and when ’tis his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After long toil and travelling, to miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kernel of his hopes, how more than vile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, for him there’s refreshment even in toil:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another city doth he set about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free from the smallest pebble-bead of doubt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he will seize on trickling honey-combs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas, he finds them dry; and then he foams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And onward to another city speeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this is human life: the war, the deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The disappointment, the anxiety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imagination’s struggles, far and nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All human; bearing in themselves this good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they are still the air, the subtle food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make us feel existence, and to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How quiet death is. Where soil is, men grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether to weeds or flowers; but for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no depth to strike in: I can see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naught earthly worth my compassing; so stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a misty, jutting head of land⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone? No, no; and by the Orphean lute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When mad Eurydice is listening to ’t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’d rather stand upon this misty peak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With not a thing to sigh for, or to seek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the soft shadow of my thrice seen love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than be⁠—I care not what. O meekest dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven! O Cynthia, ten times bright and fair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thy blue throne, now filling all the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glance but one little beam of temper’d light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into my bosom, that the dreadful night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tyranny of love be somewhat scared!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet do not so, sweet queen; one torment spared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would give a pang to jealous misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worse than the torment’s self: but rather tie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Large wings upon my shoulders, and point out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My love’s far dwelling. Though the playful rout</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-111"/>
					<span>Of Cupids shun thee, too divine art thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too keen in beauty, for thy silver prow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to have dipp’d in love’s most gentle stream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O be propitious, nor severely deem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My madness impious; for, by all the stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tend thy bidding, I do think the bars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That kept my spirit in are burst⁠—that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am sailing with thee through the dizzy sky!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How beautiful thou art! The world how deep!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How tremulous-dazzlingly the wheels sweep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around their axle! Then these gleaming reins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How lithe! When this thy chariot attains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its airy goal, haply some bower veils</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those twilight eyes? Those eyes!⁠—my spirit fails⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear goddess, help! or the wide gaping air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will gulf me⁠—help!”⁠—At this, with madden’d stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lifted hands, and trembling lips, he stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like old Deucalion mountain’d o’er the flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or blind Orion hungry for the morn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, but from the deep cavern there was borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A voice, he had been froze to senseless stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor sigh of his, nor plaint, nor passion’d moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had more been heard. Thus swell’d it forth: “Descend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young mountaineer! descend where alleys bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the sparry hollows of the world!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft hast thou seen bolts of the thunder hurl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As from thy threshold; day by day hast been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little lower than the chilly sheen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of icy pinnacles, and dipp’dst thine arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the deadening ether that still charms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their marble being: now, as deep profound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As those are high, descend! He ne’er is crown’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With immortality, who fears to follow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where airy voices lead: so through the hollow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silent mysteries of earth, descend!”</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-112"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He heard but the last words, nor could contend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One moment in reflection: for he fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the fearful deep, to hide his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the clear moon, the trees, and coming madness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">’T was far too strange, and wonderful for sadness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sharpening, by degrees, his appetite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dive into the deepest. Dark, nor light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The region; nor bright, nor sombre wholly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But mingled up; a gleaming melancholy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dusky empire and its diadems;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One faint eternal eventide of gems.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, millions sparkled on a vein of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along whose track the prince quick footsteps told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all its lines abrupt and angular:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out-shooting sometimes, like a meteor-star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through a vast antre; then the metal woof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Vulcan’s rainbow, with some monstrous roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Curves hugely: now, far in the deep abyss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seems an angry lightning, and doth hiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fancy into belief: anon it leads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through winding passages, where sameness breeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vexing conceptions of some sudden change;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether to silver grots, or giant range</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sapphire columns, or fantastic bridge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Athwart a flood of crystal. On a ridge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now fareth he, that o’er the vast beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towers like an ocean-cliff, and whence he seeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hundred waterfalls, whose voices come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as the murmuring surge. Chilly and numb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bosom grew, when first he, far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descried an orbed diamond, set to fray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Darkness from his throne: ’t was like the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uprisen o’er chaos: and with such a stun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came the amazement, that, absorb’d in it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw not fiercer wonders⁠—past the wit</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-113"/>
					<span>Of any spirit to tell, but one of those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, when this planet’s sphering time doth close</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will be its high remembrancers: who they?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty ones who have made eternal day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Greece and England. While astonishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With deep-drawn sighs was quieting, he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a marble gallery, passing through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mimic temple, so complete and true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sacred custom, that he well nigh fear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To search it inwards; whence far off appear’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through a long pillar’d vista, a fair shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, just beyond, on light tiptoe divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A quiver’d Dian. Stepping awfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youth approach’d; oft turning his veil’d eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down sidelong aisles, and into niches old:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when, more near against the marble cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had touch’d his forehead, he began to thread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All courts and passages, where silence dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roused by his whispering footsteps, murmur’d faint:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And long he traversed to and fro, to acquaint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself with every mystery, and awe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, weary, he sat down before the maw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a wide outlet, fathomless and dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wild uncertainty and shadows grim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, when new wonders ceased to float before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thoughts of self came on, how crude and sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The journey homeward to habitual self!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mad pursuing of the fog-born elf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose flitting lantern, through rude nettle-brier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cheats us into a swamp, into a fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the bosom of a hated thing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">What misery most drowningly doth sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In lone Endymion’s ear, now he has raught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goal of consciousness? Ah, ’tis the thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deadly feel of solitude: for lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cannot see the heavens, nor the flow</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-114"/>
					<span>Of rivers, nor hill-flowers running wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pink and purple chequer, nor, up-piled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cloudy rack slow journeying in the west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like herded elephants; nor felt, nor prest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cool grass, nor tasted the fresh slumberous air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But far from such companionship to wear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An unknown time, surcharged with grief, away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was now his lot. And must he patient stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tracing fantastic figures with his spear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No!” exclaim’d he, “why should I tarry here?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No! loudly echoed times innumerable.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which he straightway started, and ’gan tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His paces back into the temple’s chief;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warming and glowing strong in the belief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of help from Dian: so that when again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He caught her airy form, thus did he plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moving more near the while: “O Haunter chaste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of river sides, and woods, and heathy waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where with thy silver bow and arrows keen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou now forested? O woodland Queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What smoothest air thy smoother forehead woos?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where dost thou listen to the wide halloos</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy disparted nymphs? Through what dark tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glimmers thy crescent? Wheresoe’er it be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is in the breath of heaven: thou dost taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freedom as none can taste it, nor dost waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy loveliness in dismal elements;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, finding in our green earth sweet contents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There livest blissfully. Ah, if to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It feels Elysian, how rich to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An exiled mortal, sounds its pleasant name!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within my breast there lives a choking flame⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me cool ’t the zephyr-boughs among!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A homeward fever parches up my tongue⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me slake it at the running springs!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my ear a noisy nothing rings⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me once more hear the linnet’s note!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before mine eyes thick films and shadows float⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-115"/>
					<span>O let me ’noint them with the heaven’s light!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost thou now lave thy feet and ankles white?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O think how sweet to me the freshening sluice!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost thou now please thy thirst with berry-juice?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O think how this dry palate would rejoice!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in soft slumber thou dost hear my voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O think how I should love a bed of flowers!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young goddess! let me see my native bowers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deliver me from this rapacious deep!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thus ending loudly, as he would o’erleap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His destiny, alert he stood: but when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obstinate silence came heavily again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeling about for its old couch of space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And airy cradle, lowly bow’d his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desponding, o’er the marble floor’s cold thrill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ’t was not long; for, sweeter than the rill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To its old channel, or a swollen tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To margin sallows, were the leaves he spied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flowers, and wreaths, and ready myrtle crowns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upheaping through the slab: refreshment drowns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Itself, and strives its own delights to hide⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor in one spot alone; the floral pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a long whispering birth enchanted grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before his footsteps; as when heaved anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old ocean rolls a lengthened wave to the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down whose green back the short-lived foam, all hoar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bursts gradual, with a wayward indolence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Increasing still in heart, and pleasant sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his fairy journey on he hastes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So anxious for the end, he scarcely wastes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One moment with his hand among the sweets:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward he goes⁠—he stops⁠—his bosom beats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As plainly in his ear, as the faint charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which the throbs were born. This still alarm,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-116"/>
					<span>This sleepy music, forced him walk tiptoe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it came more softly than the east could blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arion’s magic to the Atlantic isles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or than the west, made jealous by the smiles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of throned Apollo, could breathe back the lyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seas Ionian and Tyrian.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O did he ever live, that lonely man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who loved⁠—and music slew not? ’Tis the pest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love, that fairest joys give most unrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That things of delicate and tenderest worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are swallow’d all, and made a seared dearth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By one consuming flame: it doth immerse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suffocate true blessings in a curse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-happy, by comparison of bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is miserable. ’T was even so with this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dew-dropping melody, in the Carian’s ear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First heaven, then hell, and then forgotten clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vanish’d in elemental passion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And down some swart abysm he had gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not a heavenly guide benignant led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where thick myrtle branches, ’gainst his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brushing, awakened: then the sounds again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went noiseless as a passing noontide rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over a bower, where little space he stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as the sunset peeps into a wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So saw he panting light, and towards it went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through winding alleys; and lo, wonderment!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon soft verdure saw, one here, one there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cupids a-slumbering on their pinions fair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">After a thousand mazes overgone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last, with sudden step, he came upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A chamber, myrtle-wall’d, embower’d high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of light, incense, tender minstrelsy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And more of beautiful and strange beside:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For on a silken couch of rosy pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-117"/>
					<span>In midst of all, there lay a sleeping youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fondest beauty; fonder, in fair sooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than sighs could fathom, or contentment reach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And coverlids gold-tinted like the peach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ripe October’s faded marigolds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell sleek about him in a thousand folds⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not hiding up an Apollonian curve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of neck and shoulder, nor the tenting swerve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of knee from knee, nor ankles pointing light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rather, giving them to the lill’d sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Officiously. Sideway his face reposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On one white arm, and tenderly unclosed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By tenderest pressure, a faint damask mouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To slumbery pout; just as the morning south</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disparts a dew-lipp’d rose. Above his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Four lily stalks did their white honours wed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make a coronal; and round him grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All tendrils green, of every bloom and hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together intertwin’d and trammell’d fresh:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vine of glossy sprout; the ivy mesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shading its Ethiop berries; and woodbine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of velvet-leaves and bugle-blooms divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Convolvulus in streaked vases flush;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The creeper, mellowing for an autumn blush;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And virgin’s bower, trailing airily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With others of the sisterhood. Hard by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood serene Cupids watching silently.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One, kneeling to a lyre, touch’d the strings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Muffling to death the pathos with his wings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, ever and anon, uprose to look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the youth’s slumber; while another took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A willow bough, distilling odorous dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shook it on his hair; another flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In through the woven roof, and fluttering-wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rain’d violets upon his sleeping eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">At these enchantments, and yet many more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breathless Latmian wonder’d o’er and o’er;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-118"/>
					<span>Until impatient in embarrassment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He forthright pass’d, and lightly treading went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that same feather’d lyrist, who straightway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiling, thus whisper’d: “Though from upper day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art a wanderer, and thy presence here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might seem unholy, be of happy cheer!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ’t is the nicest touch of human honour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When some ethereal and high-favouring donor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presents immortal bowers to mortal sense;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As now ’t is done to thee, Endymion. Hence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was I in no wise startled. So recline</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon these living flowers. Here is wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alive with sparkles⁠—never, I aver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Ariadne was a vintager,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So cool a purple: taste these juicy pears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sent me by sad Vertumnus, when his fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were high about Pomona: here is cream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deepening to richness from a snowy gleam;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweeter than that nurse Amalthea skimm’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the boy Jupiter: and here, undimm’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By any touch, a bunch of blooming plums</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ready to melt between an infant’s gums:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here is manna pick’d from Syrian trees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In starlight, by the three Hesperides.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feast on, and meanwhile I will let thee know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all these things around us.” He did so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still brooding o’er the cadence of his lyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus: “I need not any hearing tire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By telling how the sea-born goddess pined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a mortal youth, and how she strove to bind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him all in all unto her doating self.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who would not be so prison’d? but, fond elf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was content to let her amorous plea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint through his careless arms; content to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An unseized heaven dying at his feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Content, O fool! to make a cold retreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When on the pleasant grass such love, love-lorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay sorrowing; when every tear was born</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-119"/>
					<span>Of diverse passion; when her lips and eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were closed in sullen moisture, and quick sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came vex’d and pettish through her nostrils small.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hush! no exclaim⁠—yet, justly might’st thou call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Curses upon his head.⁠—I was half glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my poor mistress went distract and mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the boar tusk’d him: so away she flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Jove’s high throne, and by her plainings drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immortal tear-drops down the thunderer’s beard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereon, it was decreed he should be rear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each summer-time to life. Lo! this is he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That same Adonis, safe in the privacy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this still region all his winter-sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, sleep; for when our love-sick queen did weep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over his waned corse, the tremulous shower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heal’d up the wound, and, with a balmy power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Medicined death to a lengthened drowsiness:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which she fills with visions, and doth dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all this quiet luxury; and hath set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us young immortals, without any let.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To watch his slumber through. ’Tis well nigh pass’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even to a moment’s filling up, and fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She scuds with summer breezes, to pant through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first long kiss, warm firstling, to renew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embower’d sports in Cytherea’s isle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look! how those winged listeners all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stand anxious: see! behold!”⁠—This clamant word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broke through the careful silence; for they heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rustling noise of leaves, and out there flutter’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pigeons and doves: Adonis something mutter’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The while one hand, that erst upon his thigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay dormant, moved convulsed and gradually</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to his forehead. Then there was a hum</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sudden voices, echoing, “Come! come!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arise! awake! Clear summer has forth walk’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the clover-sward, and she has talk’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full soothingly to every nested finch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rise, Cupids! or we’ll give the bluebell pinch</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-120"/>
					<span>To your dimpled arms. Once more sweet life begin!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this, from every side they hurried in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rubbing their sleepy eyes with lazy wrists,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doubling overhead their little fists</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In backward yawns. But all were soon alive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, as delicious wine doth, sparkling, dive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In nectar’d clouds and curls through water fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from the arbour roof down swell’d an air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Odorous and enlivening; making all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To laugh, and play, and sing, and loudly call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For their sweet queen; when lo! the wreathed green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disparted, and far upward could be seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blue heaven, and a silver car, air-borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose silent wheels, fresh wet from clouds of morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spun off a drizzling dew⁠—which falling chill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On soft Adonis’ shoulders, made him still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nestle and turn uneasily about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon were the white doves plain, with necks stretch’d out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And silken traces lighten’d in descent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon, returning from love’s banishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Queen Venus leaning downward open-arm’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her shadow fell upon his breast, and charm’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tumult to his heart, and a new life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into his eyes. Ah, miserable strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for her comforting! unhappy sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But meeting her blue orbs! Who, who can write</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these first minutes? The unchariest muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To embracements warm as theirs makes coy excuse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O it has ruffled every spirit there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saving Love’s self, who stands superb to share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The general gladness: awfully he stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sovereign quell is in his waving hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sight can bear the lightning of his bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His quiver is mysterious, none can know</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-121"/>
					<span>What themselves think of it; from forth his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There darts strange light of varied hues and dyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A scowl is sometimes on his brow, but who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look full upon it feel anon the blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his fair eyes run liquid through their souls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion feels it, and no more controls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The burning prayer within him; so, bent low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had begun a plaining of his woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Venus, bending forward, said: “My child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Favour this gentle youth; his days are wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With love⁠—he⁠—but alas! too well I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou know’st the deepness of his misery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, smile not so, my son: I tell thee true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when through heavy hours I used to rue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The endless sleep of this new-born Adon’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This stranger ay I pitied. For upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dreary morning once I fled away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the breezy clouds, to weep and pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this my love: for vexing Mars had teased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me even to tears; thence, when a little eased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down-looking, vacant, through a hazy wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw this youth as he despairing stood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those same dark curls blown vagrant in the wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those same full fringed lids a constant blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over his sullen eyes: I saw him throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself on wither’d leaves, even as though</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death had come sudden; for no jot he moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet mutter’d wildly. I could hear he loved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some fair immortal, and that his embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had zoned her through the night. There is no trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this in heaven: I have mark’d each cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And find it is the vainest thing to seek;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that of all things ’t is kept secretest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion! one day thou wilt be blest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So still obey the guiding hand that fends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee safely through these wonders for sweet ends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is a concealment needful in extreme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if I guessed not so, the sunny beam</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-122"/>
					<span>Thou shouldst mount up with me. Now adieu!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here must we leave thee.”⁠—At these words upflew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The impatient doves, uprose the floating car,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up went the hum celestial. High afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latmian saw them minish into naught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when all were clear vanish’d, still he caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vivid lightning from that dreadful bow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all was darken’d, with Ætnean throe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth closed⁠—gave a solitary moan⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left him once again in twilight lone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He did not rave, he did not stare aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all those visions were o’ergone, and past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he in loneliness: he felt assured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happy times, when all he had endured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would seem a feather to the mighty prize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, with unusual gladness, on he hies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through caves, and palaces of mottled ore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gold dome, and crystal wall, and turquois floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Black polish’d porticoes of awful shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, at the last, a diamond balustrade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leading afar past wild magnificence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spiral through ruggedest loopholes, and thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretching across a void, then guiding o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enormous chasms, where, all foam and roar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Streams subterranean tease their granite beds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then heighten’d just above the silvery heads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a thousand fountains, so that he could dash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The waters with his spear; but at the splash,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Done heedlessly, those spouting columns rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sudden a poplar’s height, and ’gan to enclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His diamond path with fretwork, streaming round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alive, and dazzling cool, and with a sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply, like dolphin tumults, when sweet shells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Welcome the float of Thetis. Long he dwells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this delight; for, every minute’s space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The streams with changed magic interlace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes like delicatest lattices,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-123"/>
					<span>Cover’d with crystal vines; then weeping trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moving about as in a gentle wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, in a wink, to watery gauze refined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pour’d into shapes of curtain’d canopies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spangled, and rich with liquid broideries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flowers, peacocks, swans, and naiads fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swifter than lightning went these wonders rare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the water, into stubborn streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Collecting, mimick’d the wrought oaken beams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pillars, and frieze, and high fantastic roof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those dusk places in times far aloof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cathedrals call’d. He bade a loth farewell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To these founts Protean, passing gulf, and dell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And torrent, and ten thousand jutting shapes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half seen through deepest gloom, and griesly gapes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blackening on every side, and overhead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vaulted dome like Heaven’s, far bespread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With starlight gems: aye, all so huge and strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The solitary felt a hurried change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Working within him into something dreary,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vex’d like a morning eagle, lost, and weary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And purblind amid foggy, midnight wolds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he revives at once: for who beholds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New sudden things, nor casts his mental slough?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth from a rugged arch, in the dusk below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came mother Cybele! alone⁠—alone⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sombre chariot; dark foldings thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About her majesty, and front death-pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With turrets crown’d. Four maned lions hale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sluggish wheels; solemn their toothed maws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their surly eyes brow-hidden, heavy paws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uplifted drowsily, and nervy tails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cowering their tawny brushes. Silent sails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This shadowy queen athwart, and faints away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In another gloomy arch.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Wherefore delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young traveller, in such a mournful place?</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-124"/>
					<span>Art thou wayworn, or canst not further trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The diamond path? And does it indeed end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abrupt in middle air? Yet earthward bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy forehead, and to Jupiter cloud-borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call ardently! He was indeed wayworn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abrupt, in middle air, his way was lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cloud-borne Jove he bowed, and there crost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards him a large eagle, ’twixt whose wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without one impious word, himself he flings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Committed to the darkness and the gloom:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down, down, uncertain to what pleasant doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift as a fathoming plummet down he fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through unknown things; till exhaled asphodel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rose, with spicy fannings interbreathed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came swelling forth where little caves were wreathed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thick with leaves and mosses, that they seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Large honeycombs of green, and freshly teem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With airs delicious. In the greenest nook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eagle landed him, and farewell took.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">It was a jasmine bower, all bestrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With golden moss. His every sense had grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ethereal for pleasure; ’bove his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flew a delight half-graspable; his tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Hesperean; to his capable ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silence was music from the holy spheres;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dewy luxury was in his eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little flowers felt his pleasant sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stirr’d them faintly. Verdant cave and cell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wander’d through, oft wondering at such swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sudden exaltation: but, “Alas!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said he, “will all this gush of feeling pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away in solitude? And must they wane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like melodies upon a sandy plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without an echo? Then shall I be left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sad, so melancholy, so bereft!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet still I feel immortal! O my love,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-125"/>
					<span>My breath of life, where art thou? High above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dancing before the morning gates of heaven?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or keeping watch among those starry seven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Atlas’ children? Art a maid of the waters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of shell-winding Triton’s bright-hair’d daughters?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or art, impossible! a nymph of Dian’s,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weaving a coronal of tender scions</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For very idleness? Where’er thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methinks it now is at my will to start</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into thine arms; to scare Aurora’s train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And snatch thee from the morning; o’er the main</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To scud like a wild bird, and take thee off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thy sea-foamy cradle; or to doff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy shepherd vest, and woo thee ’mid fresh leaves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, no, too eagerly my soul deceives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its powerless self: I know this cannot be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me then by some sweet dreaming flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her entrancements: hither sleep awhile!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hither most gentle sleep! and soothing foil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For some few hours the coming solitude.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thus spake he, and that moent felt endued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With power to dream deliciously; so wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through a dim passage, searching till he found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The smoothest mossy bed and deepest, where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He threw himself, and just into the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretching his indolent arms, he took, O bliss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A naked waist: “Fair Cupid, whence is this?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A well-known voice sigh’d, “Sweetest, here am I!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which soft ravishment, with doting cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They trembled to each other.⁠—Helicon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O fountain’d hill! Old Homer’s Helicon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou wouldst spout a little streamlet o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These sorry pages; then the verse would soar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sing above this gentle pair, like lark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over his nested young: but all is dark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around thine aged top, and thy clear fount</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-126"/>
					<span>Exhales in mists to heaven. Aye, the count</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mighty Poets is made up; the scroll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is folded by the Muses; the bright roll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is in Apollo’s hand: our dazed eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have seen a new tinge in the western skies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world has done its duty. Yet, oh yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although the sun of poesy is set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These lovers did embrace, and we must weep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That there is no old power left to steep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A quill immortal in their joyous tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long time in silence did their anxious fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Question that thus it was: long time they lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fondling and kissing every doubt away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long time ere soft caressing sobs began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mellow into words, and then there ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two bubbling springs of talk from their sweet lips.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O known Unknown! from whom my being sips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such darling essence, wherefore may I not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be ever in these arms? in this sweet spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pillow my chin for ever? ever press</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These toying hands and kiss their smooth excess?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why not for ever and for ever feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That breath about my eyes? Ah, thou wilt steal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away from me again, indeed, indeed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wilt be gone away, and wilt not heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lonely madness. Speak, delicious fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is⁠—is it to be so? No! Who will dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pluck thee from me? And, of thine own will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full well I feel thou wouldst not leave me. Still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me entwine thee surer, surer⁠—now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How can we part? Elysium! Who art thou?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, that thou canst not be for ever here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or lift me with thee to some starry sphere?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enchantress! tell me by this soft embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the most soft completion of thy face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those lips, O slippery blisses, twinkling eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-127"/>
					<span>And by these tenderest, milky sovereignties⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These tenderest, and by the nectar-wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The passion”⁠—“O doved Ida the divine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion! dearest! Ah, unhappy me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soul will ’scape us⁠—O felicity!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How he does love me! His poor temples beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the very tune of love⁠—how sweet, sweet, sweet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revive, dear youth, or I shall faint and die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revive, or these soft hours will hurry by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tranced dullness; speak, and let that spell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affright this lethargy! I cannot quell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its heavy pressure, and will press at least</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lips to thine, that they may richly feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until we taste the life of love again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What! dost thou move? dost kiss? O bliss! O pain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love thee, youth, more than I can conceive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so long absence from thee doth bereave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul of any rest: yet must I hence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, can I not to starry eminence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uplift thee; nor for very shame can own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself to thee. Ah, dearest, do not groan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or thou wilt force me from this secrecy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I must blush in heaven. O that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had done it already; that the dreadful smiles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At my lost brightness, my impassion’d wiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had waned from Olympus’ solemn height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from all serious Gods; that our delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was quite forgotten, save of us alone!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wherefore so ashamed? ’T is but to atone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For endless pleasure, by some coward blushes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet must I be a coward!⁠—Honour rushes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too palpable before me⁠—the sad look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Jove⁠—Minerva’s start⁠—no bosom shook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With awe of purity⁠—no Cupid pinion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In reverence veiled⁠—my crystalline dominion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half lost, and all old hymns made nullity!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what is this to love? O I could fly</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-128"/>
					<span>With thee into the ken of heavenly powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thou wouldst thus, for many sequent hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press me so sweetly. Now I swear at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I am wise, that Pallas is a dunce⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps her love like mine is but unknown⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O I do think that 1 have been alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In chastity: yes, Pallas has been sighing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While every eve saw me my hair uptying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fingers cool as aspen leaves. Sweet love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was as vague as solitary dove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor knew that nests were built. Now a soft kiss⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, by that kiss, I vow an endless bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An immortality of passion’s thine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere long I will exalt thee to the shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven ambrosial; and we will shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ourselves whole summers by a river glade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will tell thee stories of the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breathe thee whispers of its minstrelsy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My happy love will overwing all bounds!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me melt into thee; let the sounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of our close voices marry at their birth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us entwine hoveringly⁠—O dearth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of human words! roughness of mortal speech!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lispings empyrean will I sometime teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine honey’d tongue⁠—lute-breathings which I gasp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have thee understand, now while I clasp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee thus, and weep for fondness⁠—I am pain’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion: woe! woe! is grief contain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the very deeps of pleasure, my sole life?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hereat, with many sobs, her gentle strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melted into a languor. He return’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entranced vows and tears.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Ye who have yearn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With too much passion, will here stay and pity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the mere sake of truth; as ’t is a ditty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not of these days, but long ago ’t was told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a cavern wind unto a forest old;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-129"/>
					<span>And then the forest told it in a dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a sleeping lake, whose cool and level gleam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A poet caught as he was journeying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Phœbus’ shrine; and in it he did fling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His weary limbs, bathing an hour’s space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after, straight in that inspired place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sang the story up into the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giving it universal freedom. There</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has it been ever sounding for those ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose tips are glowing hot. The legend cheers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yon sentinel stars; and he who listens to it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must surely be self-doom’d or he will rue it:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For quenchless burnings come upon the heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made fiercer by a fear lest any part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should be engulfed in the eddying wind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As much as here is penn’d doth always find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A resting-place, thus much comes clear and plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon the strange voice is upon the wane⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’t is but echoed from departing sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the fair visitant at last unwound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her gentle limbs, and left the youth asleep.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus the tradition of the gusty deep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Now turn we to our former chroniclers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion awoke, that grief of hers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet paining on his ear: he sickly guess’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How lone he was once more, and sadly press’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His empty arms together, hung his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And most forlorn upon that widow’d bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat silently. Love’s madness he had known:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Often with more than tortured lion’s groan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moanings had burst from him; but now that rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had pass’d away: no longer did he wage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rough-voiced war against the dooming stars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, he had felt too much for such harsh jars:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lyre of his soul Æolian tuned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgot all violence, and but communed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With melancholy thought: O he had swoon’d</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-130"/>
					<span>Drunken from pleasure’s nipple; and his love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Henceforth was dove-like.⁠—Loth was he to move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the imprinted couch, and when he did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T was with slow, languid paces, and face hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In muffling hands. So temper’d, out he stray’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half seeing visions that might have dismay’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alecto’s serpents; ravishments more keen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Hermes’ pipe, when anxious he did lean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over eclipsing eyes: and at the last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a sounding grotto, vaulted, vast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erstudded with a thousand, thousand pearls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crimson-mouthed shells with stubborn curls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every shape and size, even to the bulk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which whales harbour close, to brood and sulk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against an endless storm. Moreover too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fish-semblances, of green and azure hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ready to snort their streams. In this cool wonder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion sat down, and ’gan to ponder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On all his life: his youth, up to the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When ’mid acclaim, and feasts, and garlands gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stept upon his shepherd throne: the look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his white palace in wild forest nook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the revels he had lorded there:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each tender maiden whom he once thought fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With every friend and fellow-woodlander⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass’d like a dream before him. Then the spur</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the old bards to mighty deeds: his plans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To nurse the golden age ’mong shepherd clans:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wondrous night: the great Pan festival:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sister’s sorrow; and his wanderings all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until into the earth’s deep maw he rush’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all its buried magic, till it flush’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High with excessive love. “And now,” thought he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How long must I remain in jeopardy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of blank amazements that amaze no more?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I have tasted her sweet soul to the core,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All other depths are shallow; essences,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once spiritual, are like muddy lees,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-131"/>
					<span>Meant but to fertilize my earthly root,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make my branches lift a golden fruit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the bloom of heaven: other light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though it be quick and sharp enough to blight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Olympian eagle’s vision, is dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark as the parentage of chaos. Hark!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My silent thoughts are echoing from these shells;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or they are but the ghosts, the dying swells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of noises far away?⁠—list!”⁠—Hereupon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He kept an anxious ear. The humming tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came louder, and behold, there as he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On either side outgush’d, with misty spray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A copious spring; and both together dash’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift, mad, fantastic round the rocks, and lash’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the conchs and shells of the lofty grot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving a trickling dew. At last they shot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down from the ceiling’s height, pouring a noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of some breathless racers whose hopes poise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the last few steps, and with spent force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the ground they took a winding course.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion follow’d⁠—for it seem’d that one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever pursued, the other strove to shun⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow’d their languid mazes, till well nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had left thinking of the mystery,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was now rapt in tender hoverings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the vanish’d bliss. Ah? what is it sings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His dream away? What melodies are these?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They sound as through the whispering of trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not native in such barren vaults. Give ear!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“O Arethusa, peerless nymph! why fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such tenderness as mine? Great Dian, why,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why didst thou hear her prayer? O that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were rippling round her dainty fairness now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Circling about her waist, and striving how</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To entice her to a dive! then stealing in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between her luscious lips and eyelids thin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O that her shining hair was in the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-132"/>
					<span>And I distilling from it thence to run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In amorous rillets down her shrinking form!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To linger on her lily shoulders, warm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between her kissing breasts, and every charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touch raptured!⁠—see how painfully I flow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair maid, be pitiful to my great woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stay, stay thy weary course, and let me lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A happy wooer, to the flowery mead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all that beauty snared me.”⁠—“Cruel god,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desist! or my offended mistress’ nod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will stagnate all thy fountains:⁠—tease me not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With siren words⁠—Ah, have I really got</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such power to madden thee? And is it true⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away, away, or I shall dearly rue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My very thoughts: in mercy then away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kindest Alpheus, for should I obey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My own dear will, ’t would be a deadly bane.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O, Oread-Queen! would that thou hadst a pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like this of mine, then would I fearless turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be a criminal.” “Alas, I burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shudder⁠—gentle river, get thee hence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alpheus! thou enchanter! every sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mine was once made perfect in these woods.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh breezes, bowery lawns, and innocent floods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kipe fruits, and lonely couch, contentment gave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ever since I heedlessly did lave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thy deceitful stream, a panting glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew strong within me: wherefore serve me so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And call it love? Alas! ’t was cruelty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not once more did I close my happy eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the thrush’s song. Away! avaunt!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O ’t was a cruel thing.”⁠—“Now thou dost taunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So softly, Arethusa, that I think</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou wast playing on my shady brink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wouldst bathe once again. Innocent maid!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stifle thine heart no more;⁠—nor be afraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of angry powers: there are deities</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will shade us with their wings. Those fitful sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-133"/>
					<span>’T is almost death to hear: O let me pour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dewy balm upon them!⁠—fear no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet Arethusa! Dian’s self must feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes these very pangs. Dear maiden, steal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blushing into my soul, and let us fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These dreary caverns for the open sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will delight thee all my winding course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the green sea up to my hidden source</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About Arcadian forests; and will show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The channels where my coolest waters flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through mossy rocks; where ’mid exuberant green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I roam in pleasant darkness, more unseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Saturn in his exile; where I brim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round flowery islands, and take thence a skim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mealy sweets, which myriads of bees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Buzz from their honey’d wings: and thou shouldst please</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself to choose the richest, where we might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be incense-pillow’d every summer night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doff all sad fears, thou white deliciousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let us be thus comforted; unless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou couldst rejoice to see my hopeless stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurry distracted from Sol’s temperate beam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pour to death along some hungry sands.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What can I do, Alpheus? Dian stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Severe before me: persecuting fate!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unhappy Arethusa! thou wast late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A huntress free in’⁠—At this, sudden fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those two sad streams adown a fearful dell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latmian listen’d, but he heard no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save echo, faint repeating o’er and o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The name of Arethusa. On the verge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that dark gulf he wept, and said; “I urge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, gentle Goddess of my pilgrimage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By our eternal hopes, to soothe, to assuage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou art powerful, these lovers’ pains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make them happy in some happy plains.”</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-134"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He turn’d⁠—there was a whelming sound⁠—he stept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a cooler light; and so he kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards it by a sandy path, and lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More suddenly than doth a moment go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The visions of the earth were gone and fled⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw the giant sea above his head.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="endymion-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>There are who lord it o’er their fellow-men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With most prevailing tinsel: who unpen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their baaing vanities, to browse away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The comfortable green and juicy hay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From human pastures; or, O torturing fact!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, through an idiot blink, will see unpack’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fire-branded foxes to sear up and singe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our gold and ripe-ear’d hopes. With not one tinge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sanctuary splendour, not a sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Able to face an owl’s, they still are dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the blear-eyed nations in empurpled vests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crowns, and turbans. With unladen breasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save of blown self-applause, they proudly mount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To their spirit’s perch, their being’s high account,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their tiptop nothings, their dull skies, their thrones⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the fierce intoxicating tones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of trumpets, shoutings, and belabour’d drums,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sudden cannon. Ah! how all this hums,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In wakeful ears, like uproar past and gone⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like thunder-clouds that spake to Babylon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And set those old Chaldeans to their tasks.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are then regalities all gilded masks?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, there are throned seats unscalable</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by a patient wing, a constant spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or by ethereal things that, unconfined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can make a ladder of the eternal wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-135"/>
					<span>And poise about in cloudy thunder-tents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To watch the abysm-birth of elements.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, ’bove the withering of old-lipp’d Fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand Powers keep religious state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In water, fiery realm, and airy bourne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, silent as a consecrated urn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hold spherey sessions for a season due.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet few of these far majesties, ah, few!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have bared their operations to this globe⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Few, who with gorgeous pageantry enrobe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our piece of heaven⁠—whose benevolence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shakes hand with our own Ceres; every sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Filling with spiritual sweets to plenitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As bees gorge full their cells. And, by the feud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt Nothing and Creation, I here swear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eterne Apollo! that thy Sister fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is of all these the gentlier-mightiest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thy gold breath is misting in the west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She unobserved steals unto her throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there she sits most meek and most alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if she had not pomp subservient;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if thine eye, high Poet! was not bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards her with the Muses in thine heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the minist’ring stars kept not apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waiting for silver-footed messages.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Moon! the oldest shades ’mong oldest trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feel palpitations when thou lookest in:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Moon! old boughs lisp forth a holier din</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The while they feel thine airy fellowship.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou dost bless everywhere, with silver lip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kissing dead things to life. The sleeping kine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Couch’d in thy brightness, dream of fields divine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Innumerable mountains rise, and rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ambitious for the hallowing of thine eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet thy benediction passeth not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One obscure hiding-place, one little spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where pleasure may be sent: the nested wren</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has thy fair face within its tranquil ken,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-136"/>
					<span>And from beneath a sheltering ivy leaf</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takes glimpses of thee; thou art a relief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the poor patient oyster, where it sleeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within its pearly house.⁠—The mighty deeps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monstrous sea is thine⁠—the myriad sea!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Moon! far-spooming Ocean bows to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Tellus feels his forehead’s cumbrous load.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Cynthia! where art thou now? What far abode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of green or silvery bower doth enshrine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such utmost beauty? Alas, thou dost pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one as sorrowful: thy cheek is pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one whose cheek is pale: thou dost bewail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tears, who weeps for thee. Where dost thou sigh?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! surely that light peeps from Vesper’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or what a thing is love! ’T is She, but lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How changed, how full of ache, how gone in woe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She dies at the thinnest cloud; her loveliness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is wan on Neptune’s blue: yet there’s a stress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love-spangles, just off yon cape of trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dancing upon the waves, as if to please</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The curly foam with amorous influence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, not so idle: for down-glancing thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fathoms eddies, and runs wild about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erwhelming water-courses; scaring out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thorny sharks from hiding-holes, and fright’ning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their savage eyes with unaccustom’d lightning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where will the splendour be content to reach?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O love! how potent hast thou been to teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange journeyings! Wherever beauty dwells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In gulf or aerie, mountains or deep dells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In light, in gloom, in star or blazing sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou pointest out the way, and straight ’t is won.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid his toil thou gavest Leander breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou leddest Orpheus through the gleams of death;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-137"/>
					<span>Thou madest Pluto bear thin element;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now, O winged Chieftain! thou hast sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A moonbeam to the deep, deep water-world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find Endymion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">On gold sand impearl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lily shells, and pebbles milky white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor Cynthia greeted him, and soothed her light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against his pallid face: he felt the charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To breathlessness, and suddenly a warm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his heart’s blood: ’t was very sweet; he stay’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wandering steps, and half-entranced laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head upon a tuft of straggling weeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To taste the gentle moon, and freshening beads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lash’d from the crystal roof by fishes’ tails.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so he kept, until the rosy veils</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mantling the east, by Aurora’s peering hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were lifted from the water’s breast, and fann’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into sweet air; and sober’d morning came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meekly through billows:⁠—when like taper-flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left sudden by a dallying breath of air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rose in silence, and once more ’gan fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along his fated way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Far had he roam’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With nothing save the hollow vast, that foam’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above, around, and at his feet; save things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More dead than Morpheus’ imaginings:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old rusted anchors, helmets, breastplates large</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gone sea-warriors: brazen beaks and targe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eudders that for a hundred years had lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sway of human hand; gold vase emboss’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With long-forgotten story, and wherein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No reveller had ever dipp’d a chin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But those of Saturn’s vintage; mouldering scrolls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writ in the tongue of heaven, by those souls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who first were on the earth; and sculptures rude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ponderous stone, developing the mood</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-138"/>
					<span>Of ancient Nox;⁠—then skeletons of man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of beast, behemoth, and leviathan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And elephant, and eagle, and huge jaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of nameless monster. A cold leaden awe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These secrets struck into him; and unless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dian had chased away that heaviness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He might have died: but now, with cheered feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He onward kept; wooing these thoughts to steal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the labyrinth in his soul of love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“What is there in thee. Moon! that thou shouldst move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart so potently? When yet a child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I oft have dried my tears when thou hast smiled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou seem’dst my sister: hand in hand we went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From eve to morn across the firmament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No apples would I gather from the tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till thou hadst cool’d their cheeks deliciously:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No tumbling water ever spake romance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when my eyes with thine thereon could dance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No woods were green enough, no bower divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until thou liftedst up thine eyelids fine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sowing-time ne’er would I dibble take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or drop a seed, till thou wast wide awake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in the summer tide of blossoming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No one but thee hath heard me blithely sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mesh my dewy flowers all the night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No melody was like a passing spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it went not to solemnize thy reign.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, in my boyhood, every joy and pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thee were fashion’d to the self-same end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as I grew in years, still didst thou blend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all my ardours; thou wast the deep glen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wast the mountain-top⁠—the sage’s pen⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poet’s harp⁠—the voice of friends⁠—the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wast the river⁠—thou wast glory won;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wast my clarion’s blast⁠—thou wast my steed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-139"/>
					<span>My goblet full of wine⁠—my topmost deed:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wast the charm of women, lovely Moon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O what a wild and harmonized tune</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My spirit struck from all the beautiful!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On some bright essence could I lean, and lull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself to immortality: I prest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature’s soft pillow in a wakeful rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But gentle Orb! there came a nearer bliss⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My strange love came⁠—Felicity’s abyss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She came, and thou didst fade, and fade away⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet not entirely: no, thy starry sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has been an under-passion to this hour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I begin to feel thine orby power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is coming fresh upon me: O be kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep back thine influence, and do not blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sovereign vision.⁠—Dearest love, forgive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I can think away from thee and live!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pardon me, airy planet, that I prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One thought beyond thine argent luxuries!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How far beyond.!” At this a surprised start</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frosted the springing verdure of his heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as he lifted up his eyes to swear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How his own goddess was past all things fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw far in the concave green of the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An old man sitting calm and peacefully.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a weeded rock this old man sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his white hair was awful, and a mat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of weeds were cold beneath his cold thin feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, ample as the largest winding-sheet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cloak of blue wrapp’d up his aged bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erwrought with symbols by the deepest groans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ambitious magic: every ocean-form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was woven in with black distinctness; storm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And calm, and whispering, and hideous roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quicksand, and whirlpool, and deserted shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were emblem’d in the woof; with every shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That skims, or dives, or sleeps, ’twixt cape and cape.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-140"/>
					<span>The gulphing whale was like a dot in the spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet look upon it, and ’t would size and swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To its huge self; and the minutest fish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would pass the very hardest gazer’s wish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And show his little eye’s anatomy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then there was pictured the regality</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Neptune; and the sea-nymphs round his state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In beauteous vassalage, look up and wait.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside this old man lay a pearly wand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his lap a book, the which he conn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So steadfastly, that the new denizen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had time to keep him in amazed ken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mark these shadowings, and stand in awe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The old man raised his hoary head and saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wilder’d stranger⁠—seeming not to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His features were so lifeless. Suddenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He woke as from a trance: his snow-white brows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went arching up, and like two magic ploughs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Furrow’d deep wrinkles in his forehead large,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which kept as fixedly as rocky marge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till round his wither’d lips had gone a smile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then up he rose, like one whose tedious toil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had watch’d for years in forlorn hermitage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who had not from mid-life to utmost age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eased in one accent his o’erburden’d soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even to the trees. He rose: he grasp’d his stole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With convulsed clenches waving it abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a voice of solemn joy, that awed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Echo into oblivion, he said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Thou art the man! Now shall I lay my head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In peace upon my watery pillow: now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleep will come smoothly to my weary brow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Jove! I shall be young again, be young!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O shell-borne Neptune, I am pierced and stung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With new-born life! What shall I do? Where go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I have cast this serpent-skin of woe?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-141"/>
					<span>I’ll swim to the sirens, and one moment listen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their melodies, and see their long hair glisten;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon upon that giant’s arm I’ll be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That writhes about the roots of Sicily:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To northern seas I’ll in a twinkling sail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mount upon the snortings of a whale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To some black cloud; thence down I’ll madly sweep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On forked lightning, to the deepest deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where through some sucking pool I will be hurl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With rapture to the other side of the world!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, I am full of gladness! Sisters three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bow full-hearted to your old decree!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, every god be thank’d, and power benign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I no more shall wither, droop, and pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the man!” Endymion started back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dismay’d; and, like a wretch from whom the rack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tortures hot breath, and speech of agony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mutter’d: “What lonely death am I to die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this cold region? Will he let me freeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And float my brittle limbs o’er polar seas?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or will he touch me with his searing hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leave a black memorial on the sand?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or tear me piecemeal with a bony saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And keep me as a chosen food to draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His magian fish through hated fire and flame?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O misery of hell! resistless, tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am I to be burnt up? No, I will shout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the gods through heaven’s blue look out!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Tartarus! but some few days agone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her soft arms were entwining me, and on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her voice I hung like fruit among green leaves:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her lips were all my own, and⁠—ah, ripe sheaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happiness! ye on the stubble droop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But never may be garner’d. I must stoop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My head, and kiss death’s foot. Love! love, farewell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is there no hope from thee? This horrid spell</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-142"/>
					<span>Would melt at thy sweet breath.⁠—By Dian’s hind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeding from her white fingers, on the wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see thy streaming hair! and now, by Pan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I care not for this old mysterious man!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake, and walking to that aged form,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look’d high defiance. Lo! his heart ’gan warm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pity, for the gray-hair’d creature wept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had he then wrong’d a heart where sorrow kept?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had he, though blindly contumelious, brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rheum to kind eyes, a sting to human thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Convulsion to a mouth of many years?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had in truth; and he was ripe for tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The penitent shower fell, as down he knelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before that care-worn sage, who trembling felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About his large dark locks, and faltering spake:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Arise, good youth, for sacred Phœbus’ sake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know thine inmost bosom, and I feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A very brother’s yearning for thee steal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into mine own: for why? thou openest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prison gates that have so long opprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My weary watching. Though thou kuow’st it not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art commission’d to this fated spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For great enfranchisement. O weep no more!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am a friend to love, to loves of yore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, hadst thou never loved an unknown power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had been grieving at this joyous hour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But even now most miserable old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw thee, and my blood no longer cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave mighty pulses: in this tottering case</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew a new heart, which at this moment plays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As dancingly as thine. Be not afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou shalt hear this secret all display’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now as we speed towards our joyous task.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So saying, this young soul in age’s mask</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went forward with the Carian side by side:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-143"/>
					<span>Resuming quickly thus; while ocean’s tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung swollen at their backs, and jewell’d sands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took silently their foot-prints.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“My soul stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now past the midway from mortality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so I can prepare without a sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell thee briefly all my joy and pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was a fisher once, upon this main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my boat danced in every creek and bay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rough billows were my home by night and day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sea-gulls not more constant; for I had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No housing from the storm and tempests mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hollow rocks⁠—and they were palaces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of silent happiness, of slumberous ease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long years of misery have told me so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, thus it was one thousand years ago.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One thousand years!⁠—Is it then possible</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To look so plainly through them? to dispel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand years with backward glance sublime?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To breathe away as ’twere all scummy slime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From off a crystal pool, to see its deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one’s own image from the bottom peep?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes: now I am no longer wretched thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My long captivity and moanings all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are but a slime, a thin-pervading scum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which I breathe away, and thronging come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like things of yesterday my youthful pleasures:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“I touch’d no lute, I sang not, trod no measures:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was a lonely youth on desert shores.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sports were lonely, ’mid continuous roars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And craggy isles, and sea-mew’s plaintive cry⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plaining discrepant between sea and sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dolphins were still my playmates; shapes unseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would let me feel their scales of gold and green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor be my desolation; and, full oft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When a dread waterspout had rear’d aloft</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-144"/>
					<span>Its hungry hugeness, seeming ready ripe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To burst with hoarsest thunderings, and wipe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My life away like a vast sponge of fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some friendly monster, pitying my sad state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has dived to its foundations, gulf’d it down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left me tossing safely. But the crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all my life was utmost quietude:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More did I love to lie in cavern rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keeping in wait whole days for Neptune’s voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if it came at last, hark, and rejoice!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There blush’d no summer eve but I would steer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My skiff along green shelving coasts, to hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shepherd’s pipe come clear from aery steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mingled with ceaseless bleatings of his sheep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never was a day of summer shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I beheld its birth upon the brine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I would watch all night to see unfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven’s gates, and Æthon snort his morning gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide o’er the swelling streams: and constantly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At brim of day-tide on some grassy lea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My nets would be spread out, and I at rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poor folk of the sea-country I blest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With daily boon of fish most delicate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They knew not whence this bounty, and elate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would strew sweet flowers on a sterile beach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Why was I not contented? Wherefore reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At things which, but for thee, O Latmian!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had been my dreary death? Fool! I began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feel distemper’d longings: to desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The utmost privilege that ocean’s sire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could grant in benediction: to be free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all his kingdom. Long in misery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wasted, ere in one extremest fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I plunged for life or death. To interknit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One’s senses with so dense a breathing stuff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might seem a work of pain; so not enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can I admire how crystal-smooth it felt,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-145"/>
					<span>And buoyant round my limbs. At first I dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whole days and days in sheer astonishment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetful utterly of self-intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moving but with the mighty ebb and flow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, like a new-fledged bird that flrst doth show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spreaded feathers to the morrow chill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I tried in fear the pinions of my will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T was freedom! and at once I visited</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ceaseless wonders of this ocean-bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No need to tell thee of them, for I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou hast been a witness⁠—it must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For these I know thou canst not feel a drouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the melancholy corners of that mouth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I will in my story straightway pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To more immediate matter. Woe, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That love should be my bane! Ah, Scylla fair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why did poor Glaucus ever⁠—ever dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sue thee to his heart? Kind stranger-youth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I loved her to the very white of truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she would not conceive it. Timid thing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fled me swift as sea-bird on the wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round every isle, and point, and promontory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From where large Hercules wound up his story</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far as Egyptian Nile, My passion grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more, the more I saw her dainty hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gleam delicately through the azure clear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until ’twas too fierce agony to bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in that agony, across my grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It flash’d, that Circe might find some relief⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cruel enchantress! So above the water</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I rear’d my head, and look’d for Phœbus’ daughter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ææa’s isle was wondering at the moon:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seem’d to whirl around me, and a swoon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left me dead-drifting to that fatal power.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“When I awoke, ’t was in a twilight bower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just when the light of morn, with hum of bees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stole through its verdurous matting of fresh trees.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-146"/>
					<span>How sweet, and sweeter! for I heard a lyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over it a sighing voice expire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It ceased⁠—I caught light footsteps; and anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fairest face that morn e’er look’d upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Push’d through a screen of roses. Starry Jove!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tears, and smiles, and honey-words she wove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A net whose thraldom was more bliss than all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The range of flower’d Elysium. Thus did fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dew of her rich speech: ‘Ah! art awake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me hear thee speak, for Cupid’s sake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am so oppress’d with joy! Why, I have shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An urn of tears, as though thou wert cold dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now I find thee living, I will pour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From these devoted eyes their silver store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until exhausted of the latest drop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So it will pleasure thee, and force thee stop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, that I too may live: but if beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such cool and sorrowful offerings, thou art fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of soothing warmth, of dalliance supreme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou art ripe to taste a long love-dream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If smiles, if dimples, tongues for ardour mute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hang in thy vision like a tempting fruit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me pluck it for thee!’ Thus she link’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her charming syllables, till indistinct</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their music came to my o’er-sweeten’d soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then she hover’d over me. and stole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So near, that if no nearer it had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This furrow’d visage thou hadst never seen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Young man of Latmos! thus particular</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am I, that thou may’st plainly see how far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This fierce temptation went: and thou may’st not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exclaim, How, then, was Scylla quite forgot?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Who could resist? Who in this universe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She did so breathe ambrosia; so immerse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fine existence in a golden clime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took me like a child of suckling time,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-147"/>
					<span>And cradled me in roses. Thus condemn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The current of my former life was stemm’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to this arbitrary queen of sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bow’d a tranced vassal: nor would thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have moved, even though Amphion’s harp had woo’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me back to Scylla o’er the billows rude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as Apollo each eve doth devise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A new apparelling for western skies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So every eve, nay, every spendthrift hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shed balmy consciousness within that bower.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I was free of haunts umbrageous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could wander in the mazy forest-house</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of squirrels, foxes shy, and antler’d deer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And birds from coverts innermost and drear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warbling for very joy mellifluous sorrow⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me new-born delights!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“Now let me borrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For moments few, a temperament as stern</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Pluto’s sceptre, that my words not burn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These uttering lips, while I in calm speech tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How specious heaven was changed to real hell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“One morn she left me sleeping; half awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sought for her smooth arms and lips, to slake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My greedy thirst with nectarous camel-draughts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she was gone. Whereat the barbed shafts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of disappointment stuck in me so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That out I ran and search’d the forest o’er.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wandering about in pine and cedar gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Damp awe assail’d me; for there ’gan to boom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sound of moan, an agony of sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sepulchral from the distance all around.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then came a conquering earth-thunder, and rumbled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fierce complain to silence: while I stumbled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down a precipitous path, as if impell’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I came to a dark valley.⁠—Groanings swell’d</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-148"/>
					<span>Poisonous about my ears, and louder grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nearer I approach’d a flame’s gaunt blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That glared before me through a thorny brake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This fire, like the eye of gordian snake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bewitch’d me towards; and I soon was near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sight too fearful for the feel of fear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thicket hid I cursed the haggard scene⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The banquet of my arms, my arbour queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seated upon an uptorn forest root;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all around her shapes, wizard and brute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laughing, and wailing, grovelling, serpenting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showing tooth, tusk, and venom-bag, and sting!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O such deformities! old Charon’s self.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should he give up awhile his penny pelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take a dream ’mong rushes Stygian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It could not be so fantasied. Fierce, wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tyrannizing was the lady’s look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As over them a gnarled staff she shook.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ofttimes upon the sudden she laugh’d out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from a basket emptied to the rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clusters of grapes, the which they raven’d quick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And roar’d for more; with many a hungry lick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About their shaggy jaws. Avenging, slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon she took a branch of mistletoe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And emptied on ’t a black dull-gurgling phial:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groan’d one and all, as if some piercing trial</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was sharpening for their pitiable bones.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She lifted up the charm: appealing groans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From their poor breasts went sueing to her ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain; remorseless as an infant’s bier</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She whisk’d against their eyes the sooty oil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat was heard a noise of painful toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Increasing gradual to a tempest rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shrieks, yells, and groans of torture-pilgrimage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until their grieved bodies ’gan to bloat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And puff from the tail’s end to stifled throat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then was appalling silence: then a sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More wildering than all that hoarse affright;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-149"/>
					<span>For the whole herd, as by a whirlwind writhen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went through the dismal air like one huge Python</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Antagonizing Boreas,⁠—and so vauish’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet there was not a breath of wind: she banish’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These phantoms with a nod. Lo! from the dark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came waggish fauns, and nymphs, and satyrs stark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dancing and loud revelry,⁠—and went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swifter than centaurs after rapine bent.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighing an elephant appear’d and bow’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the fierce witch, speaking thus aloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In human accent: ‘Potent goddess! chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of pains resistless! make my being brief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or let me from this heavy prison fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or give me to the air, or let me die!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sue not for my happy crown again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sue not for my phalanx on the plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sue not for my lone, my widow’d wife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sue not for my ruddy drops of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My children fair, my lovely girls and boys!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will forget them; I will pass these joys;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ask nought so heavenward, so too⁠—too high:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only I pray, as fairest boon, to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or be deliver’d from this cumbrous flesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From this gross, detestable, filthy mesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And merely given to the cold bleak air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have mercy. Goddess! Circe, feel my prayer!’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“That curst magician’s name fell icy numb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my wild conjecturing: truth had come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naked and sabre-like against my heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw a fury whetting a death-dart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my slain spirit, overwrought with fright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fainted away in that dark lair of night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think, my deliverer, how desolate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My waking must have been! disgust, and hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And terrors manifold divided me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A spoil amongst them. I prepared to flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the dungeon core of that wild wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-150"/>
					<span>I fled three days⁠—when lo! before me stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glaring the angry witch. O Dis, even now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A clammy dew is beading on my brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At mere remembering her pale laugh, and curse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Ha! ha! Sir Dainty! there must be a nurse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made of rose-leaves and thistle-down, express,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cradle thee my sweet, and lull thee: yes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am too flinty-hard for thy nice touch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My tenderest squeeze is but a giant’s clutch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, fairy-thing, it shall have lullabies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unheard of yet; and it shall still its cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon some breast more lily-feminine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, no⁠—it shall not pine, and pine, and pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than one pretty, trifling thousand years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then ’twere pity, but fate’s gentle shears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cut short its immortality. Sea-flirt!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young dove of the waters! truly I’ll not hurt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One hair of thine: see how I weep and sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That our heart-broken parting is so nigh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And must we part? Ah, yes, it must be so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet ere thou leavest me in utter woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me sob over thee my last adieus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And speak a blessing: Mark me! thou hast thews</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immortal, for thou art of heavenly race:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But such a love is mine, that here I chase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternally away from thee all bloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of youth, and destine thee towards a tomb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence shalt thou quickly to the watery vast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there, ere many days be overpast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disabled age shall seize thee; and even then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt not go the way of aged men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But live and wither, cripple and still breathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten hundred years: which gone, I then bequeath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy fragile bones to unknown burial.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu, sweet love, adieu!’⁠—As shot stars fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fled ere I could groan for mercy. Stung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And poisoned was my spirit: despair sung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A war-song of defiance ’gainst all hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-151"/>
					<span>A hand was at my shoulder to compel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sullen steps; another “fore my eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moved on with pointed finger. In this guise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enforced, at the last by ocean’s foam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I found me; by my fresh, my native home.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its tempering coolness, to my life akin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came salutary as I waded in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a blind voluptuous rage, I gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Battle to the swollen billow-ridge, and drave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Large froth before me, while yet there remain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hale strength, nor from my bones all marrow drain’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Young lover, I must weep⁠—such hellish spite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dry cheek who can tell? While thus my might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proving upon this element, dismay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a dead thing’s face my hand I laid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I look’d⁠—’t was Scylla! Cursed, cursed Circe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O vulture-witch, hast never heard of mercy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could not thy harshest vengeance be content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou must nip this tender innocent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because I lov’d her?⁠—Cold, O cold indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were her fair limbs, and like a common weed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sea-swell took her hair. Dead as she was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I clung about her waist, nor ceased to pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fleet as an arrow through unfathom’d brine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until there shone a fabric crystalline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ribb’d and inlaid with coral, pebble, and pearl.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Headlong I darted: at one eager swirl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gain’d its bright portal, enter’d, and behold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T was vast, and desolate, and icy-cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all around⁠—But wherefore this to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in few minutes more thyself shalt see?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I left poor Scylla in a niche and fled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fever’d parchings up, my scathing dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Met palsy half way: soon these limbs became</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gaunt, wither’d, sapless, feeble, cramp’d, and lame.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-152"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Now let me pass a cruel, cruel space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without one hope, without one faintest trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mitigation, or redeeming bubble</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of colour’d phantasy: for I fear ’t would trouble</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy brain to loss of reason: and next tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How a restoring chance came down to quell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One half of the witch in me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“On a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitting upon a rock above the spray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw grow up from the horizon’s brink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gallant vessel: soon she seem’d to sink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away from me again, as though her course</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had been resumed in spite of hindering force⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So vanish’d: and not long, before arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark clouds, and muttering of winds morose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Æolus would stifle his mad spleen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But could not; therefore, all the billows green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toss’d up the silver spume against the clouds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tempest came: I saw that vessel’s shrouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In perilous bustle; while upon the deck</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood trembling creatures. I beheld the wreck;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The final gulfing; the poor struggling souls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard their cries amid loud thunder-rolls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O they had all been saved but crazed eld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Annull’d my vigorous cravings; and thus quell’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And curb’d, think on ’t, O Latmian! did I sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writhing with pity, and a cursing fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against that hell-born Circe. The crew had gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By one and one, to pale oblivion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I was gazing on the surges prone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a scalding tear, and many a groan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When at my feet emerged an old man’s hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grasping this scroll, and this same slender wand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I knelt with pain⁠—reach’d out my hand⁠—had grasp’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These treasures⁠—touch’d the knuckles⁠—they un-clasp’d⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-153"/>
					<span>I caught a finger; but the downward weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erpower’d me⁠—it sank. Then ’gan abate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The storm, and through chill aguish gloom outburst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The comfortable sun. I was athirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To search the book, and in the warming air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parted its dripping leaves with eager care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange matters did it treat of, and drew on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul page after page, till well nigh won</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into forgetfulness; when, stupefied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I read these words, and read again, and tried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My eyes against the heavens, and read again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O what a load of misery and pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each Atlas-line bore off!⁠—a shine of hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came gold around me, cheering me to cope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strenuous with hellish tyranny. Attend!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou hast brought their promise to an end.”</span>
				</p>
				<p class="excerpt">
					<span class="i1">In the wide sea there lives a forlorn wretch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doom’d with enfeebled carcase to outstretch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His loath’d existence through ten centuries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then to die alone. Who can devise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A total opposition? No one. So</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One million times ocean must ebb and flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he oppressed. Yet he shall not die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things accomplish’d:⁠—If he utterly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scans all the depths of magic, and expounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The meanings of all motions, shapes, and sounds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he explores all forms and substances</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straight homeward to their symbol-essences;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shall not die. Moreover, and in chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He must pursue this task of joy and grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most piously;⁠—all lovers tempest-tost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the savage overtchelming lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shall deposit side by side, until</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time’s creeping shall the dreary space fulfil:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which done, and all these labours ripened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A youth, by heavenly power loved and led,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-154"/>
					<span>Shall stand before him; whom he shall direct</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How to consummate all. The youth elect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must do the thing, or both will be destroyed.⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Then,” cried the young Endymion, overjoy’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“We are twin brothers in this destiny!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, I entreat thee, what achievement high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is, in this restless world, for me reserved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What! if from thee my wandering feet had swerved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had we both perish’d?”⁠—“Look!” the sage replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Dost thou not mark a gleaming through the tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of divers brilliances? ’t is the edifice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I told thee of, where lovely Scylla lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where I have enshrined piously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All lovers, whom fell storms have doom’d to die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throughout my bondage.” Thus discoursing, on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They went till unobscured the porches shone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which hurryingly they gain’d, and enter’d straight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sure never since king Neptune held his state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was seen such wonder underneath the stars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn to some level plain where haughty Mars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has legion’d all his battle; and behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How every soldier, with firm foot, doth hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His even breast: see, many steeled squares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rigid ranks of iron⁠—whence who dares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One step? Imagine further, line by line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These warrior thousands on the field supine;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So in that crystal place, in silent rows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor lovers lay at rest from joys and woes.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stranger from the mountains, breathless, traced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such thousands of shut eyes in order placed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such ranges of white feet, and patient lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All ruddy,⁠—for here death no blossom nips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He mark’d their brows and foreheads; saw their hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put sleekly on one side with nicest care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each one’s gentle wrists, with reverence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put cross-wise to its heart.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-155"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“Let us commence,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whisper’d the guide, stuttering with joy, “even now.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spake, and, trembling like an aspen-bough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began to tear his scroll in pieces small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uttering the while some mumblings funeral.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tore it into pieces small as snow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That drifts unfeather’d when bleak northerns blow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And having done it, took his dark blue cloak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bound it round Endymion: then struck</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wand against the empty air times nine.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What more there is to do, young man, is thine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first a little patience; first undo</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This tangled thread, and wind it to a clue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, gentle! ’t is as weak as spider’s skein;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shouldst thou break it⁠—What, is it done so clean?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A power overshadows thee! Oh, brave!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spite of hell is tumbling to its grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here is a shell; ’t is pearly blank to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor mark’d with any sign or charactery⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Canst thou read aught? O read for pity’s sake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Olympus! we are safe! Now, Carian, break</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This wand against yon lyre on the pedestal.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">’T was done: and straight with sudden swell and fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet music breathed her soul away, and sigh’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lullaby to silence.⁠—“Youth! now strew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These minced leaves on me, and passing through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those files of dead, scatter the same around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou wilt see the issue.”⁠—’Mid the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flutes and viols, ravishing his heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion from Glaucus stood apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scatter’d in his face some fragments light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How lightning-swift the change! a youthful wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiling beneath a coral diadem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out-sparkling sudden like an upturn’d gem,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-156"/>
					<span>Appear’d, and, stepping to a beauteous corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kneel’d down beside it, and with tenderest force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press’d its cold hand, and wept⁠—and Scylla sigh’d!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion, with quick hand, the charm applied⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nymph arose: he left them to their joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And onward went upon his high employ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showering those powerful fragments on the dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as he pass’d, each lifted up its head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As doth a flower at Apollo’s touch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death felt it to his inwards: ’t was too much:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death fell a-weeping in his charnel-house.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latmian persevered along, and thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All were reanimated. There arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A noise of harmony, pulses and throes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gladness in the air⁠—while many, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had died in mutual arms devout and true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprang to each other madly; and the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt a high certainty of being blest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They gazed upon Endymion. Enchantment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew drunken, and would have its head and bent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delicious symphonies, like airy flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Budded, and swell’d, and, full-blown, shed full showers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of light, soft, unseen leaves of sounds divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The two deliverers tasted a pure wine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happiness, from fairy press oozed out.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speechless they eyed each other, and about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair assembly wandered to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distracted with the richest overflow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of joy that ever pour’d from heav’n.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">—“Away!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouted the new born god; “Follow, and pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our piety to Neptunus supreme!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Scylla, blushing sweetly from her dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They led on first, bent to her meek surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through portal columns of a giant size</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-157"/>
					<span>Into the vaulted, boundless emerald.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joyous all follow’d, as the leader call’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down marble steps; pouring as easily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hour-glass sand⁠—and fast, as you might see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swallows obeying the south summer’s call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or swans upon a gentle waterfall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thus went that beautiful multitude, nor far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere from among some rocks of glittering spar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just within ken, they saw descending thick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another multitude. Whereat more quick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moved either host. On a wide sand they met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of those numbers every eye was wet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For each their old love found. A murmuring rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like what was never heard in all the throes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wind and waters: ’t is past human wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell; ’tis dizziness to think of it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">This mighty consummation made, the host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moved on for many a league; and gain’d and lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Huge sea-marks; vanward swelling in array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the rear diminishing away,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till a faint dawn surprised them. Glaucus cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Behold! behold, the palace of his pride!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God Neptune’s palaces.” With noise increased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They shoulder’d on towards that brightening east.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At every onward step proud domes arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In prospect⁠—diamond gleams and golden glows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of amber ’gainst their faces levelling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joyous, and many as the leaves in spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still onward; still the splendour gradual swell’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich opal domes were seen, on high upheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By jasper pillars, letting through their shafts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A blush of coral. Copious wonder-draughts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each gazer drank; and deeper drank more near:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what poor mortals fragment up, as mere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As marble was there lavish, to the vast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of one fair palace, that far, far surpass’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-158"/>
					<span>Even for common bulk, those olden three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Memphis, and Babylon, and Nineveh.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As large, as bright, as colour’d as the bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Iris, when unfading it doth show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond a silvery shower, was the arch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which this Paphian army took its march,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the outer courts of Neptune’s state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence could be seen, direct, a golden gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which the leaders sped; but not half raught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere it burst open swift as fairy thougnt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made those dazzled thousands veil their eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like callow eagles at the first sunrise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon with an eagle nativeness their gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ripe from hue-golden swoons took all the blaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, behold! large Neptune on his throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of emerald deep: yet not exalt alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At his right hand stood winged Love, and on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His left sat smiling Beauty’s paragon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Far as the mariner on highest mast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can see all round upon the calmed vast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wide was Neptune’s hall: and as the blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth vault the waters, so the waters drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their doming curtains, high, magnificent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awed from the throne aloof;⁠—and when storm rent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disclosed the thunder-gloomings in Jove’s air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soothed as now, flash’d sudden everywhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Noiseless, sub-marine cloudlets, glittering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death to a human eye: for there did spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From natural west, and east, and south, and north,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A light as of four sunsets, blazing forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gold-green zenith ’bove the Sea-God’s head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of lucid depth the floor, and far outspread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As breezeless lake, on which the slim canoe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of feather’d Indian darts about, as through</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-159"/>
					<span>The delicatest air: air verily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for the portraiture of clouds and sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This palace floor breath-air,⁠—but for the amaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of deep-seen wonders motionless,⁠—and blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the dome pomp, reflected in extremes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Globing a golden sphere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">They stood in dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Triton blew his horn. The palace rang;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Nereids danced; the Sirens faintly sang;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the great Sea-King bow’d his dripping head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Love took wing, and from his pinions shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On all the multitude a nectarous dew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ooze-born Goddess beckoned and drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair Scylla and her guides to conference;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when they reach’d the throned eminence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She kiss’d the sea-nymph’s cheek,⁠—who sat her down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A-toying with the doves. Then,⁠—“Mighty crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sceptre of this kingdom!” Venus said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thy vows were on a time to Nais paid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold!”⁠—Two copious tear-drops instant fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the God’s large eyes; he smiled delectable.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over Glaucus held his blessing hands.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Endymion! Ah! still wandering in the bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love? Now this is cruel. Since the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I met thee in earth’s bosom, all my power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have I put forth to serve thee. What, not yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Escaped from dull mortality’s harsh net?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little patience, youth! ’twill not be long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or I am skilless quite: an idle tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A humid eye, and steps luxurious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where these are new and strange, are ominous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, I have seen these signs in one of heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When others were all blind; and were I given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To utter secrets, haply I might say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some pleasant words:⁠—but Love will have his day.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-160"/>
					<span>So wait awhile expectant. Pr’ythee soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even in the passing of thine honey-moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Visit thou my Cytherea: thon wilt find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cupid well-natured, my Adonis kind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pray persuade with thee⁠—Ah, I have done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All blisses be upon thee, my sweet son!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus the fair goddess: while Endymion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knelt to receive those accents halcyon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Meantime a glorious revelry began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the water-monarch. Nectar ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In courteous fountains to all cups out-reach’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plunder’d vines, teeming exhaustless, pleach’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New growth about each shell and pendent lyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which, in disentangling for their fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pull’d down fresh foliage and coverture</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For dainty toying. Cupid, empire-sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flutter’d and laugh’d, and oft-times through the throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made a delighted way. Then dance, and song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And garlanding, grew wild; and pleasure reign’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In harmless tendril they each other chain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strove who should be smother’d deepest in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh crush of leaves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">O ’t is a very sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one so weak to venture his poor verse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such a place as this. O do not curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High Muses! let him hurry to the ending.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">All suddenly were silent. A soft blending</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dulcet instruments came charmingly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then a hymn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“King of the stormy sea!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brother of Jove, and co-inheritor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of elements! Eternally before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee the waves awful bow. Fast, stubborn rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-161"/>
					<span>At thy fear’d trident shrinking, doth unlock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its deep foundations, hissing into foam.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All mountain-rivers, lost in the wide home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy capacious bosom, ever flow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou frownest, and old Æolus thy foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Skulks to his cavern, ’mid the gruff complaint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all his rebel tempests. Dark clouds faint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, from thy diadem, a silver gleam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slants over blue dominion. Thy bright team</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gulfs in the morning light, and scuds along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bring thee nearer to that golden song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo singeth, while his chariot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waits at the doors of heaven. Thou art not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For scenes like this: an empire stern hast thou;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it hath furrow’d that large front: yet now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As newly come of heaven, dost thou sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To blend and interknit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Subdued majesty with this glad time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O shell-borne King sublime!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We lay our hearts before thee evermore⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We sing, and we adore!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Breathe softly, flutes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be tender of your strings, ye soothing lutes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor be the trumpet heard! O vain, O vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not flowers budding in an April rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor breath of sleeping dove, nor river’s flow,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, nor the Æolian twang of Love’s own bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can mingle music fit for the soft ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of goddess Cytherea!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet deign, white Queen of Beauty, thy fair eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On our soul’s sacrifice.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Bright-winged Child!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who has another care when thou hast smiled?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unfortunates on earth, we see at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All death-shadows, and glooms that overcast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our spirits, fann’d away by thy light pinions.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-162"/>
					<span>O sweetest essence! sweetest of all minions!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God of warm pulses, and dishevell’d hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And panting bosoms bare!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear unseen light in darkness! eclipser</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of light in light! delicious poisoner!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy venom’d goblet will we quaff until</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We fill⁠—we fill!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by thy Mother’s lips⁠⸺’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Was heard no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For clamour, when the golden palace door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open’d again, and from without, in shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A new magnificence. On oozy throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smooth-moving came Oceanus the old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take a latest glimpse at his sheepfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before he went into his quiet cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To muse for ever⁠—Then a lucid wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scoop’d from its trembling sisters of mid-sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afloat, and pillowing up the majesty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Doris, and the Ægean seer, her spouse⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next, on a dolphin, clad in laurel boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Theban Amphion leaning on his lute:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fingers went across it⁠—All were mute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gaze on Amphitrite, queen of pearls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Thetis pearly too.⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">The palace whirls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around giddy Endymion; seeing he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was there far strayed from mortality.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could not bear it⁠—shut his eyes in vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imagination gave a dizzier pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O I shall die! sweet Venus, be my stay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is my lovely mistress? Wellaway!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I die⁠—I hear her voice⁠—I feel my wing’⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Neptune’s feet he sank. A sudden ring’⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Nereids were about him, in kind strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To usher back his spirit into life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still he slept. At last they interwove</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-163"/>
					<span>Their cradling arms, and purposed to convey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards a crystal bower far away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Lo! while slow carried through the pitying crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his inward senses these words spake aloud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Written in starlight on the dark above:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i>Dearest Endymion! my entire love!</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>How have I dwelt in fear of fate; ’t is done⁠—</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Immortal bliss for me too hast thou won.</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Arise then! for the hen-dove shall not hatch</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Her ready eggs, before I’ll kissing snatch</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Thee into endless heaven. Awake! awake!</i>’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The youth at once arose: a placid lake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came quiet to his eyes; and forest green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cooler than all the wonders he had seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lull’d with its simple song his fluttering breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How happy once again in grassy nest!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="endymion-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Muse of my native land! loftiest Muse!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O first-born on the mountains! by the hues</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven on the spiritual air begot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long didst thou sit alone in northern grot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While yet our England was a wolfish den;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before our forests heard the talk of men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the first of Druids was a child:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long didst thou sit amid our regions wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rapt in a deep prophetic solitude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came an eastern voice of solemn mood:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet wast thou patient. Then sang forth the Nine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo’s garland:⁠—yet didst thou divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such home-bred glory, that they cried in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Come hither, Sister of the Island!” Plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spake fair Ausonia; and once more she spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A higher summons:⁠—still didst thou betake</span>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-164"/>
					<span>Thee to thy native hopes. O thou hast won</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A full accomplishment! The thing is done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which undone, these our latter days had risen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On barren souls. Great Muse, thou know’st what prison</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flesh and bone, curbs, and confines, and frets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our spirits’ wings: despondency besets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our pillows; and the fresh to-morrow morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seems to give forth its light in very scorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of our dull, uninspired, snail-paced lives.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long have I said, how happy he who shrives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee! But then I thought on poets gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And could not pray:⁠—nor can I now⁠—so on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I move to the end in lowliness of heart.⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ah, woe is me! that I should fondly part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From my dear native land! Ah, foolish maid!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glad was the hour, when, with thee, myriads bade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu to Ganges and their pleasant fields!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To one so friendless the clear freshet yields</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bitter coolness; the ripe grape is sour:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I would have, great gods! but one short hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of native air⁠—let me but die at home.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Endymion to heaven’s airy dome</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was offering up a hecatomb of vows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When these words reach’d him. Whereupon he bows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head through thorny-green entanglement</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of underwood, and to the sound is bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anxious as hind towards her hidden fawn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Is no one near to help me? No fair dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life from charitable voice? No sweet saying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To set my dull and sadden’d spirit playing?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No hand to toy with mine? No lips so sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may worship them? No eyelids meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To twinkle on my bosom? No one dies</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-165"/>
					<span>Before me, till from these enslaving eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Redemption sparkles!⁠—I am sad and lost.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thou, Carian lord, hadst better have been tost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a whirlpool. Vanish into air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm mountaineer! for canst thou only bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woman’s sigh alone and in distress?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See not her charms! Is Phœbe passionless?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phœbe is fairer far⁠—O gaze no more:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet if thou wilt behold all beauty’s store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold her panting in the forest grass!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do not those curls of glossy jet surpass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For tenderness the arms so idly lain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongst them? Feelest not a kindred pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see such lovely eyes in swimming search</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After some warm delight, that seems to perch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dovelike in the dim cell lying beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their upper lids?⁠—Hist!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“O for Hermes’ wand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To touch this flower into human shape!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That woodland Hyacinthus could escape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his green prison, and here kneeling down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call me his queen, his second life’s fair crown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah me, how I could love!⁠—My soul doth melt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the unhappy youth⁠—Love! I have felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So faint a kindness, such a meek surrender</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what my own full thoughts had made too tender,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That but for tears my life had fled away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye deaf and senseless minutes of the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, old forest, hold ye this for true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no lightning, no authentic dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the eye of love: there’s not a sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melodious howsoever, can confound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heavens and earth in one to such a death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As doth the voice of love: there’s not a breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will mingle kindly with the meadow air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it has panted round, and stolen a share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of passion from the heart!”⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-166"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Upon a bough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leant, wretched. He surely cannot now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thirst for another love: O impious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he can even dream upon it thus!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought he, “Why am I not as are the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since to a woe like this I have been led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the dark earth, and through the wondrous sea?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goddess! I love thee not the less: from thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Juno’s smile I turn not⁠—no, no, no⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the great waters are at ebb and flow.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have a triple soul! O fond pretence⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For both, for both my love is so immense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I feel my heart is cut for them in twain.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And so he groan’d, as one by beauty slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lady’s heart beat quick, and he could see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her gentle bosom heave tumultuously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sprang from his green covert: there she lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet as a musk-rose upon new-made hay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all her limbs on tremble, and her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shut softly up alive. To speak he tries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Fair damsel, pity me! forgive that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus violate thy bower’s sanctity!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O pardon me, for I am full of grief⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grief born of thee, young angel! fairest thief!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who stolen hast away the wings wherewith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was to top the heavens. Dear maid, sith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art my executioner, and I feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loving and hatred, misery and weal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will in a few short hours be nothing to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all my story that much passion slew me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do smile upon the evening of my days;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for my tortured brain begins to craze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be thou my nurse; and let me understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How dying I shall kiss that lily hand.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost weep for me? Then should I be content.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scowl on, ye fates! until the firmament</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-167"/>
					<span>Outblackens Erebus, and the full-cavern’d earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crumbles into itself. By the cloud-girth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Jove, those tears have given me a thirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet oblivion.”⁠—As her heart would burst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The maiden sobb’d awhile, and then replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why must such desolation betide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As that thou speakest of? Are not these green nooks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empty of all misfortune? Do the brooks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Utter a gorgon voice? Does yonder thrush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Schooling its half-fledged little ones to brush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the dewy forest, whisper tales?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speak not of grief, young stranger, or cold snails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will slime the rose to-night. Though if thou wilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methinks ’t would be a guilt⁠—a very guilt⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to companion thee, and sigh away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The light⁠—the dusk⁠—the dark⁠—till break of day!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Dear lady,” said Endymion, “’t is past:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love thee! and my days can never last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may pass in patience still speak:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me have music dying, and I seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more delight⁠—I bid adieu to all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Didst thou not after other climates call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And murmur about Indian streams?”⁠—Then she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitting beneath the midmost forest tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For pity sang this roundelay⁠⸺⁠</span>
				</p>
				<section epub:type="chapter z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span class="i2">“O Sorrow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Why dost borrow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The natural hue of health, from vermeil lips?⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To give maiden blushes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To the white rose bushes?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or is’t thy dewy hand the daisy tips?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">“O Sorrow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Why dost borrow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The lustrous passion from a falcon-eye?⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-168"/>
						<span class="i2">To give the glowworm light?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Or, on a moonless night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To tinge, on siren shores, the salt sea-spry?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">“O Sorrow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Why dost borrow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The mellow ditties from a mourning tongue?⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To give at evening pale</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Unto the nightingale,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That thou mayst listen the cold dews among?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">“O Sorrow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Why dost borrow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heart’s lightness from the merriment of May?⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">A lover would not tread</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">A cowslip on the head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though he should dance from eve till peep of day⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Nor any drooping flower</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Held sacred for thy bower,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherever he may sport himself and play.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">“To Sorrow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">I bade good morrow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thought to leave her far away behind;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">But cheerly, cheerly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">She loves me dearly;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She is so constant to me, and so kind;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">I would deceive her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And so leave her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ah! she is so constant and so kind.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Beneath my palm-trees, by the river side</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I sat a-weeping: in the whole world wide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There was no one to ask me why I wept,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And so I kept</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brimming the water-lily cups with tears</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Cold as my fears.</span>
					</p>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-169"/>
					<p>
						<span>“Beneath my palm-trees, by the river side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I sat a-weeping: what enamour’d bride,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cheated by shadowy wooer from the clouds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">But hides and shrouds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beneath dark palm-trees by a river side?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“And as I sat, over the light blue hills</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There came a noise of revellers: the rills</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the wide stream came of purple hue⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">’T was Bacchus and his crew!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The earnest trumpet spake, and silver thrills</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From kissing cymbals made a merry din⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">’T was Bacchus and his kin!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Like to a moving vintage down they came,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crown’d with green leaves, and faces all on flame;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All madly dancing through the pleasant valley,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To scare thee, Melancholy!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O then, O then, thou wast a simple name!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I forgot thee, as the berried holly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By shepherds is forgotten, when, in June,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tall chestnuts keep away the sun and moon:⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">I rush’d into the folly!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Within his car, aloft, young Bacchus stood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Trifling his ivy-dart, in dancing mood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">With sidelong laughing;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And little rills of crimson wine imbrued</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His plump white arms, and shoulders, enough white</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">For Venus’ pearly bite;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And near him rode Silenus on his ass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pelted with flowers as he on did pass</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Tipsily quaffing.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Whence came ye, merry Damsels! whence came ye!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So many, and so many, and such glee?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why have ye left your bowers desolate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Your lutes, and gentler fate?</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-170"/>
						<span>‘We follow Bacchus! Bacchus on the wing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">A conquering!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bacchus, young Bacchus! good or ill betide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We dance before him thorough kingdoms wide:⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come hither, lady fair, and joined be</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To our wild minstrelsy!’</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Whence came ye, jolly Satyrs! whence came ye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So many, and so many, and such glee?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why have ye left your forest haunts, why left</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Your nuts in oak-tree cleft?⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>‘For wine, for wine we left our kernel tree;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For wine we left our heath, and yellow brooms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And cold mushrooms;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For wine we follow Bacchus through the earth;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Great god of breathless cups and chirping mirth!⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come hither, lady fair, and joined be</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To our mad minstrelsy!’</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Over wide streams and mountains great we went,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, save when Bacchus kept his ivy tent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Onward the tiger and the leopard pants,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">With Asian elephants:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Onward these myriads⁠—with song and dance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With zebras striped, and sleek Arabians’ prance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Web-footed alligators, crocodiles,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bearing upon their scaly backs, in files,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Plump infant laughers mimicking the coil</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of seamen, and stout galley-rowers’ toil:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With toying oars and silken sails they glide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Nor care for wind and tide.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Mounted on panthers’ furs and lions’ manes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From rear to van they scour about the plains;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A three days’ journey in a moment done;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And always, at the rising of the sun,</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-171"/>
						<span>About the wilds they hunt with spear and horn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">On spleenful unicorn.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“I saw Osirian Egypt kneel adown</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Before the vine-wreath crown!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I saw parch’d Abyssinia rouse and sing</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To the silver cymbals’ ring!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I saw the whelming vintage hotly pierce</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Old Tartary the fierce!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Kings of Inde their jewel-sceptres vail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from their treasures scatter pearled hail;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Great Brahma from his mystic heaven groans,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And all his priesthood moans;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before young Bacchus’ eye-wink turning pale,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into these regions came I following him,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sick-hearted, weary⁠—so I took a whim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To stray away into these forests drear</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Alone, without a peer:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I have told thee all thou mayest hear.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">“Young Stranger!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">I’ve been a ranger</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In search of pleasure throughout every clime:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Alas, ’t is not for me!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Bewitch’d I sure must be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To lose in grieving all my maiden prime.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">“Come then, Sorrow!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Sweetest Sorrow!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like an own babe I nurse thee on my breast;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">I thought to leave thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And deceive thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But now of all the world I love thee best.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">“There is not one,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">No, no, not one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But thee to comfort a poor lonely maid;</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-172"/>
						<span class="i2">Thou art her mother,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And her brother,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her playmate, and her wooer in the shade.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O what a sigh she gave in finishing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And look, quite dead to every wordly thing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion could not speak, but gazed on her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And listened to the wind that now did stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the crisped oaks full drearily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet with as sweet a softness as might be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remember’d from its velvet summer song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last he said: “Poor lady, how thus long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have I been able to endure that voice?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair Melody! kind Siren! I’ve no choice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must be thy sad servant evermore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot choose but kneel here and adore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas, I must not think⁠—by Phœbe, no!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me not think, soft Angel! shall it be so?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, beautifullest, shall I never think?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou couldst foster me beyond the brink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of recollection! make my watchful care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close up its bloodshot eyes, nor see despair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do gently murder half my soul, and I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall feel the other half so utterly!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m giddy at that cheek so fair and smooth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let it blush so ever! let it soothe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My madness! let it mantle rosy-warm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the tinge of love, panting in safe alarm.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This cannot be thy hand, and yet it is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this is sure thine other softling⁠—this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine own fair bosom, and I am so near!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt fall asleep! O let me sip that tear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whisper one sweet word that I may know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is this world⁠—sweet dewy blossom!”⁠—<em>Woe!</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Woe! woe to that Endymion! Where is he?⁠—</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even these words went echoing dismally</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the wide forest⁠—a most fearful tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one repenting in his latest moan;</span>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-173"/>
					<span>And while it died away a shade pass’d by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of a thundercloud. When arrows fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the thick branches, poor ringdoves sleek forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their timid necks and tremble; so these both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leant to each other trembling, and sat so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waiting for some destruction⁠—when lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foot-feather’d Mercury appear’d sublime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the tall tree tops; and in less time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than shoots the slanted hail-storm, down he dropt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards the ground; but rested not, nor stopt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One moment from his home: only the sward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with his wand light touch’d, and heavenward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swifter than sight was gone⁠—even before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The teeming earth a sudden witness bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his swift magic. Diving swans appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the crystal circlings white and clear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And catch the cheated eye in wild surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How they can dive in sight and unseen rise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from the turf outsprang two steeds jet-black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each with large dark blue wings upon his back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youth of Caria placed the lovely dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On one, and felt himself in spleen to tame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other’s fierceness. Through the air they flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High as the eagles. Like two drops of dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exhaled to Phœbus’ lips, away they are gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the earth away⁠—unseen, alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among cool clouds and winds, but that the free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The buoyant life of song can floating be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above their heads, and follow them untired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Muse of my native land, am I inspired?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is the giddy air, and I must spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide pinions to keep here; nor do I dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or height, or depth, or width, or any chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Precipitous: I have beneath my glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those towering horses and their mournful freight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could I thus sail, and see, and thus await</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fearless for power of thought, without thine aid?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-174"/>
					<span>There is a sleepy dusk, an odorous shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From some approaching wonder, and behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those winged steeds, with snorting nostrils bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snuff at its faint extreme, and seem to tire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dying to embers from their native fire!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">There curl’d a purple mist around them; soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seem’d as when around the pale new moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad Zephyr droops the clouds like weeping willow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T was Sleep slow journeying with head on pillow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the first time, since he came nigh dead-born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the old womb of night, his cave forlorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had he left more forlorn; for the first time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He felt aloof the day and morning’s prime⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because into his depth Cimmerian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came a dream, showing how a young man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere a lean bat could plump its wintery skin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would at high Jove’s empyreal footstool win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An immortality, and how espouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jove’s daughter, and be reckon’d of his house.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now was he slumbering towards heaven’s gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he might at the threshold one hour wait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear the marriage melodies, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sink downward to his dusky cave again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His litter of smooth semilucent mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diversely tinged with rose and amethyst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Puzzled those eyes that for the centre sought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scarcely for one moment could be caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sluggish form reposing motionless.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those two on winged steeds, with all the stress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of vision search’d for him, as one would look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Athwart the sallows of a river nook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To catch a glance at silver-throated eels⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or from old Skiddaw’s top, when fog conceals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His rugged forehead in a mantle pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an eye-guess towards some pleasant vale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descry a favourite hamlet faint and far.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-175"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">These raven horses, though they foster’d are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of earth’s splenetic fire, dully drop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their fuU-vein’d ears, nostrils blood wide, and stop;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the spiritless mist have they outspread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ample feathers, are in slumber dead,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on those pinions, level in mid air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion sleepeth and the lady fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slowly they sail, slowly as icy isle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a calm sea drifting: and meanwhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mournful wanderer dreams. Behold! he walks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On heaven’s pavement; brotherly he talks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To divine powers: from his hand full fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juno’s proud birds are pecking pearly grain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tries the nerve of Phœbus’ golden bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asketh where the golden apples grow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his arm he braces Pallas’ shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strives in vain to unsettle and to wield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Jovian thunderbolt: arch Hebe brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A full-brimm’d goblet, dances lightly, sings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tantalizes long; at last he drinks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lost in pleasure, at her feet he sinks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touching with dazzled lips her starlight hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He blows a bugle,⁠—an ethereal band</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are visible above: the Seasons four,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Green-kirtled Spring, flush Summer, golden store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Autumn’s sickle. Winter frosty hoar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Join dance with shadowy Hours; while still the blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In swells unmitigated, still doth last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sway their floating morris. “Whose is this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose bugle?” he inquires: they smile⁠—“O Dis!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why is this mortal here? Dost thou not know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its mistress’ lips? Not thou?⁠—’T is Dian’s: lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She rises crescented!” He looks, ’t is she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His very goddess: good-bye earth, and sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And air, and pains, and care, and suffering;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good-bye to all but love! Then doth he spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards her, and awakes⁠—and, strange, o’erhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-176"/>
					<span>Of those same fragrant exhalations bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beheld awake his very dream: the gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood smiling; merry Hebe laughs and nods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Phœbe bends towards him crescented.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O state perplexing! On the pinion bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too well awake, he feels the panting side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his delicious lady. He who died</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For soaring too audacious in the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that same treacherous wax began to run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt not more tongue-tied than Endymion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His heart leapt up as to its rightful throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that fair-shadow’d passion pulsed its way⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, what perplexity! Ah, well a day!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fond, so beauteous was his bed-fellow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could not help but kiss her: then he grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awhile forgetful of all beauty save</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young Phœbe’s, golden-hair’d; and so ’gan crave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgiveness: yet he turn’d once more to look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the sweet sleeper,⁠—all his soul was shook,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She press’d his hand in slumber; so once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could not help but kiss her and adore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this the shadow wept, melting away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latmian started up: “Bright goddess, stay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Search my most hidden breast! By truth’s own tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have no dædale heart; why is it wrung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To desperation? Is there nought for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the bourne of bliss, but misery?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">These words awoke the stranger of dark tresses:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dawning love-look rapt Endymion blesses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ’haviour soft. Sleep yawn’d from underneath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou swan of Ganges, let us no more breathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This murky phantasm! thou contented seem’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pillow’d in lovely idleness, nor dream’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What horrors may discomfort thee and me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, shouldst thou die from my heart-treachery!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet did she merely weep⁠—her gentle soul</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-177"/>
					<span>Hath no revenge in it: as it is whole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tenderness, would I were whole in love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can I prize thee, fair maid, all price above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even when I feel as true as innocence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do, I do.⁠—What is this soul then? Whence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came it? It does not seem my own, and I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have no self-passion or identity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some fearful end must be: where, where is it?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Nemesis, I see my spirit flit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone about the dark⁠—Forgive me, sweet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall we away?” He roused the steeds; they beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their wings chivalrous into the clear air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving old Sleep within his vapoury lair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The good-night blush of eve was waning slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Vesper, risen star, began to throe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the dusk heavens silvery, when they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus sprang direct towards the Galaxy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did speed hinder converse soft and strange⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternal oaths and vows they interchange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such wise, in such temper, so aloof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up in the winds, beneath a starry roof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So witless of their doom, that verily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis well nigh past man’s search their hearts to see⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether they wept, or laugh’d or grieved or toy’d⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most like with joy gone mad, with sorrow cloy’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Full facing their swift flight, from ebon streak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon put forth a little diamond peak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No bigger than an unobserved star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On tiny point of fairy scimetar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright signal that she only stoop’d to tie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her silver sandals, ere deliciously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She bow’d into the heavens her timid head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slowly she rose, as though she would have fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While to his lady meek the Carian turn’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mark if her dark eyes had yet discern’d</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-178"/>
					<span>This beauty in its birth⁠—Despair! despair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw her body fading gaunt and spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the cold moonshine. Straight he seized her wrist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It melted from his grasp; her hand he kiss’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, horror! kiss’d his own⁠—he was alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her steed a little higher soar’d and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dropt hawk-wise to the earth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">There lies a den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the seeming confines of the space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made for the soul to wander in and trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its own existence, of remotest glooms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark regions are around it, where the tombs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of buried griefs the spirit sees, but scarce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One hour doth linger weeping, for the pierce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of new-born woe it feels more inly smart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in these regions many a venom’d dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At random flies; they are the proper home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every ill: the man is yet to come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hath not journey’d in this native hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But few have ever felt how calm and well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleep may be had in that deep den of all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There anguish does not sting, nor pleasure pall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woe-hurricanes beat ever at the gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet all is still within and desolate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beset with painful gusts, within ye hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sound so loud as when on curtain’d bier</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The death-watch tick is stifled. Enter none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who strive therefor: on the sudden it is won.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just when the sufferer begins to burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then it is free to him; and from an urn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still fed by melting ice, he takes a draught⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young Semele such richness never quaff’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her maternal longing. Happy gloom!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark Paradise! where pale becomes the bloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of health by due; where silence dreariest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is most articulate; where hopes infest;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-179"/>
					<span>Where those eyes are the brightest far that keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their lids shut longest in a dreamless sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O happy spirit-home! O wondrous soul!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pregnant with such a den to save the whole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thine own depth. Hail, gentle Carian!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, never since thy griefs and woes began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou felt so content: a grievous feud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath led thee to this Cave of Quietude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, his lull’d soul was there, although upborne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dangerous speed: and so he did not mourn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he knew not whither he was going.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So happy was he, not the aerial blowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of trumpets at clear parley from the east</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could rouse from that fine relish, that high feast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stung the feather’d horse; with fierce alarm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He flapp’d towards the sound. Alas, no charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could lift Endymion’s head, or he had view’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A skyey mask, a pinion’d multitude,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And silvery was its passing: voices sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warbling the while as if to lull and greet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wanderer in his path. Thus warbled they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While past the vision went in bright array.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Who, who from Dian’s feast would be away?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the golden bowers of the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are empty left? Who, who away would be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Cynthia’s wedding and festivity?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not Hesperus: lo! upon his silver wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leans away for highest heaven and sings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snapping his lucid fingers merrily!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, Zephyrus! art here, and Flora too!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye tender bibbers of the rain and dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young playmates of the rose and daffodil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be careful, ere ye enter in, to fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Your baskets high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fennel green, and balm, and golden pines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Savory, latter-mint, and columbines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cool parsley, basil sweet, and sunny thyme;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-180"/>
					<span>Yea, every flower and leaf of every clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All gather’d in the dewy morning: hie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Away! fly, fly!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crystalline brother of the belt of heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aquarius! to whom king Jove has given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two liquid pulse streams ’stead of feather’d wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two fanlike fountains⁠—thine illuminings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">For Dian play:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dissolve the frozen purity of air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let thy white shoulders silvery and bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show cold through watery pinions; make more bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Star-Queen’s crescent on her marriage night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Haste, haste away!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Castor has tamed the planet Lion, see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the Bear has Pollux mastery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A third is in the race! who is the third,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speeding away swift as the eagle bird?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">The ramping Centaur!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Lion’s mane’s on end: the Bear how fierce!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Centaur’s arrow ready seems to pierce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some enemy: far forth his bow is bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into tlie blue of heaven. He’ll be shent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Pale unrelentor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he shall hear the wedding lutes a-playing.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Andromeda! sweet woman! why delaying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So timidly among the stars: come hither!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Join this bright throng, and nimbly follow whither</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">They all are going.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Danae’s Son, before Jove newly bow’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has wept for thee, calling to Jove aloud.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, gentle lady, did he disenthrall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye shall for ever live and love, for all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Thy tears are flowing.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Daphne’s fright, behold Apollo!”⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">More</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion heard not: down his steed him bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prone to the green head of a misty hill.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-181"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">His first touch of the earth went nigh to kill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas!” said he, “were I but always borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through dangerous winds, had but my footsteps worn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A path in hell, for ever would I bless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Horrors which nourish an uneasiness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my own sullen conquering: to him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lives beyond earth’s boundary, grief is dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sorrow is but a shadow: now I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grass; I feel the solid ground⁠—Ah, me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is thy voice⁠—divinest! Where?⁠—who? who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left thee so quiet on this bed of dew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold upon this happy earth we are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us ay love each other; let us fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On forest-fruits, and never, never go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the abodes of mortals here below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or be by phantoms duped. O destiny!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a labyrinth now my soul would fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with thy beauty will I deaden it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where didst thou melt to? By thee will I sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ever: let our fate stop here⁠—a kid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I on this spot will offer: Pan will bid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us live in peace, in love and peace among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His forest wildernesses. I have clung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To nothing, loved a nothing, nothing seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or felt but a great dream! Oh, I have been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presumptuous against love, against the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against all elements, against the tie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mortals each to each, against the blooms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flowers, rush of rivers, and the tombs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heroes gone! Against his proper glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has my own soul conspired: so my story</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will I to children utter, and repent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There never lived a mortal man, who bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His appetite beyond his natural sphere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But starved and died. My sweetest Indian, here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here will I kneel, for thou redeemed hast</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-182"/>
					<span>My life from too thin breathing: gone and past</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are cloudy phantasms. Caverns lone, farewell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And air of visions, and the monstrous swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of visionary seas! No, never more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall airy voices cheat me to the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of tangled wonder, breathless and aghast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu, my daintiest Dream! although so vast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My love is still for thee. The hour may come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we shall meet in pure elysium.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On earth I may not love thee; and therefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doves will I offer up, and sweetest store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All through the teeming year: so thou wilt shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On me, and on this damsel fair of mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bless our simple lives. My Indian bliss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My river-lily bud! one human kiss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One sigh of real breath⁠—one gentle squeeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm as a dove’s nest among summer trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And warm with dew at ooze from living blood!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither didst melt? Ah, what of that!⁠—all good</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’ll talk about⁠—no more of dreaming.⁠—Now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where shall our dwelling be? Under the brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some steep mossy hill, where ivy dun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would hide us up, although spring leaves were none;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where dark yew trees, as we rustle through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will drop their scarlet berry cups of dew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou wouldst joy to live in such a place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dusk for our loves, yet light enough to grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those gentle limbs on mossy bed reclined:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by one step the blue sky shouldst thou find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by another, in deep dell below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See, through the trees, a little river go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in its mid-day gold and glimmering.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honey from out the gnarled hive I’ll bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And apples, wan with sweetness, gather thee,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cresses that grow where no man may them see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sorrel untorn by the dew-claw’d stag:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-183"/>
					<span>Pipes will I fashion of the syrinx flag,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou mayst always know whither I roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it shall please thee in our quiet home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To listen and think of love. Still let me speak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still let me dive into the joy I seek,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For yet the past doth prison me. The rill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou haply mayst delight in, will I fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fairy fishes from the mountain tarn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt feed them from the squirrel’s barn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its bottom will I strew with amber shells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pebbles blue from deep enchanted wells.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its sides I’ll plant with dew-sweet eglantine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And honeysuckles full of clear bee-wine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will entice this crystal rill to trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s silver name upon the meadow’s face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll kneel to Vesta, for a flame of fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to god Phœbus, for a golden lyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Empress Dian, for a hunting-spear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Vesper, for a taper silver-clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may see thy beauty through the night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Flora, and a nightingale shall light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tame on thy finger; to the River-gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they shall bring thee taper fishing-rods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gold, and lines of Naiads’ long bright tress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven shield thee for thine utter loveliness!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy mossy footstool shall the altar be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Fore which I’ll bend, bending, dear love, to thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those lips shall be my Delphos, and shall speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laws to my footsteps, colour to my cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembling or steadfastness to this same voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of three sweetest pleasurings the choice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that affectionate light, those diamond things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those eyes, those passions, those supreme pearl springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be my grief, or twinkle me to pleasure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, is not bliss within our perfect seizure?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O that I could not doubt!”</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-184"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">The mountaineer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus strove by fancies vain and crude to clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His brier’d path to some tranquillity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It gave bright gladness to his lady’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet the tears she wept were tears of sorrow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answering thus, just as the golden morrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beam’d upward from the valleys of the east:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O that the flutter of his heart had ceased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the sweet name of love had pass’d away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young feather’d tyrant! by a swift decay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt thou devote this body to the earth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I do think that at my very birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lisp’d thy blooming titles inwardly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For at the first, first dawn and thought of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With uplift hands I blest the stars of heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou not cruel? Ever have I striven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think thee kind, but ah, it will not do!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When yet a child, I heard that kisses drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Favour from thee, and so I gave and gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the void air, bidding them find out love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when I came to feel how far above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All fancy, pride, and fickle maidenhood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All earthly pleasure, all imagined good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was the warm tremble of a devout kiss,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even then, that moment, at the thought of this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fainting I fell into a bed of flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And languish’d there three days. Ye milder powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am I not cruelly wrong’d? Believe, believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me, dear Endymion, were I to weave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With my own fancies garlands of sweet life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shouldst be one of all. Ah, bitter strife!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may not be thy love: I am forbidden⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indeed I am⁠—thwarted, affrighted, chidden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By things I tremble at, and gorgon wrath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twice hast thou ask’d whither I went: henceforth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ask me no more! I may not utter it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor may I be thy love. We might commit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ourselves at once to vengeance; we might die;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-185"/>
					<span>We might embrace and die: voluptuous thought!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enlarge not to my hunger, or I’m caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In trammels of perverse deliciousness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, no, that shall not be: thee will I bless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bid a long adieu,”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">The Carian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No word return’d: both lovelorn, silent, wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the valleys green together went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far wandering, they were perforce content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sit beneath a fair lone beechen tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor at each other gazed, but heavily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pored on its hazel cirque of shedded leaves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Endymion! unhappy! it nigh grieves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me to behold thee thus in last extreme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enskied ere this, but truly that I deem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truth the best music in a first-born song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy lute-voiced brother will I sing ere long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt aid⁠—hast thou not aided me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, moonlight Emperor! felicity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has been thy meed for many thousand years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet often have I, on the brink of tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mourn’d as if yet thou wert a forester;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetting the old tale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">He did not stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes from the dead leaves, or one small pulse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of joy he might have felt. The spirit culls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unladed amaranth, when wild it strays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the old garden-ground of boyish days.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little onward ran the very stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which he took his first soft poppy dream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the very bark ’gainst which he leant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A crescent he had carved, and round it spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His skill in little stars. The teeming tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had swollen and green’d the pious charactery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not ta’en out. Why, there was not a slope</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-186"/>
					<span>Up which he had not fear’d the antelope;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a tree, beneath whose rooty shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had not with his tamed leopards play’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor could an arrow light, or javelin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fly in the air where his had never been⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet he knew it not.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">O treachery!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why does his lady smile, pleasing her eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all his sorrowing? He sees her not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But who so stares on him? His sister sure!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona of the woods!⁠—Can she endure⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impossible⁠—how dearly they embrace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His lady smiles; delight is in her face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is no treachery.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“Dear brother mine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion, weep not so! Why shouldst thou pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all great Latmos so exalt will be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thank the great gods, and look not bitterly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And speak not one pale word, and sigh no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sure I will not believe thou hast such store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of grief, to last thee to my kiss again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou surely canst not bear a mind in pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come hand in hand with one so beautiful.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be happy both of you! for I will pull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flowers of autumn for your coronals.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pan’s holy priest for young Endymion calls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he is restored, thou, fairest dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shalt be our queen. Now, is it not a shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see ye thus,⁠—not very, very sad?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps ye are too happy to be glad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O feel as if it were a common day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free-voiced as one who never was away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No tongue shall ask, Whence come ye? but ye shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be gods of your own rest imperial.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not even I, for one whole month, will pry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the hours that have pass’d us by,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-187"/>
					<span>Since in my arbour I did sing to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Hermes! on this very night will be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hymning up to Cynthia, queen of light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the soothsayers old saw yesternight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good visions in the air,⁠—whence will befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As say these sages, health perpetual</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shepherds and their flocks; and furthermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Dian’s face they read the gentle lore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore for her these vesper-carols are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our friends will all be there from nigh and far.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many upon thy death have ditties made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many, even now, their foreheads shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cypress, on a day of sacrifice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New singing for our maids shalt thou devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pluck the sorrow from our huntsmen’s brows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me, my lady-queen, how to espouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This wayward brother to his rightful joys!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes are on thee bent, as thou didst poise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fate most goddess-like. Help me, I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lure⁠—Endymion, dear brother, say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What ails thee?” He could bear no more, and so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bent his soul fiercely like a spiritual bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twang’d it inwardly, and calmly said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I would have thee my only friend, sweet maid!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My only visitor! not ignorant though,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That those deceptions which for pleasure go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mong men, are pleasures real as real may be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there are higher ones I may not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If impiously an earthly realm I take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since I saw thee, I have been wide awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Night after night, and day by day, until</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the empyrean I have drunk my fill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let it content thee. Sister, seeing me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More happy than betides mortality.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hermit young, I’ll live in mossy cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where thou alone shalt come to me, and lave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy spirit in the wonders I shall tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through me the shepherd realm shall prosper well;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-188"/>
					<span>For to thy tongue will I all health confide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for my sake, let this young maid abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thee as a dear sister. Thou alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona, mayst return to me. I own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This may sound strangely: but when, dearest girl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou seest it for my happiness, no pearl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will trespass down those cheeks. Companion fair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt be content to dwell with her, to share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This sister’s love with me?” Like one resign’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bent by circumstance, and thereby blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In self-commitment, thus that meek unknown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Aye, but a buzzing by my ears has flown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of jubilee to Dian:⁠—truth I heard!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well then, I see there is no little bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tender soever, but is Jove’s own care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long have I sought for rest, and, unaware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold I find it! so exalted too!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So after my own heart! I knew, I knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a place untenanted in it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that same void white Chastity shall sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And monitor me nightly to lone slumber.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sanest lips I vow me to the number</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Dian’s sisterhood; and, kind lady,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thy good help, this very night shall see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My future days to her fane consecrate.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As feels a dreamer what doth most create</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His own particular fright, so these three felt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like one who, in after ages, knelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Lucifer or Baal, when he’d pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After a little sleep: or when in mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far under-ground, a sleeper meets his friends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who know him not. Each diligently bends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards common thoughts and things for very fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Striving their ghastly malady to cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thinking it a thing of yes and no,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That housewives talk of. But the spirit-blow</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-189"/>
					<span>Was struck, and all were dreamers. At the last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion said: “Are not our fates all cast?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why stand we here? Adieu, ye tender pair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu!” Whereat those maidens, with wild stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walk’d dizzily away. Pained and hot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes went after them, until they got</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near to a cypress grove, whose deadly maw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one swift moment, would what then he saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Engulf for ever. “Stay,” he cried, “ah, stay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn, damsels! hist! one word I have to say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet Indian, I would see thee once again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is a thing I dote on: so I’d fain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona, ye should hand in hand repair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into those holy groves that silent are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind great Dian’s temple. I’ll be yon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Vesper’s earliest twinkle⁠—they are gone⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But once, once, once again⁠—” At this he press’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hands against his face, and then did rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head upon a mossy hillock green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so remain’d as he a corpse had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the long day; save when he scantly lifted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes abroad, to see how shadows shifted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the slow move of time,⁠—sluggish and weary</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the poplar tops, in journey dreary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had reach’d the river’s brim. Then up he rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, slowly as that very river flows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walk’d towards the temple grove with this lament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why such a golden eve? The breeze is sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Careful and soft, that not a leaf may fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the serene father of them all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bows down his summer head below the west.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now am I of breath, speech, and speed possest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at the setting I must bid adieu</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her for the last time. Night will strew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the damp grass myriads of lingering leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with them shall I die; nor much it grieves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To die, when summer dies on the cold sward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, I have been a butterfly, a lord</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-190"/>
					<span>Of flowers, garlands, love-knots, silly posies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groves, meadows, melodies, and arbour-roses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My kingdom’s at its death, and just it is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I should die with it: so in all this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We miscall grief, bale, sorrow, heart-break, woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is there to plain of? By Titan’s foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am but rightly served.” So saying, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tripp’d lightly on, in sort of deathful glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laughing at the clear stream and setting sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though they jests had been: nor had he done</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His laugh at nature’s holy countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until that grove appear’d, as if perchance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then his tongue with sober seemlihed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave utterance as he enter’d: “Ha!” I said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“King of the butterflies; but by this gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by old Rhadamanthus’ tongue af doom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This dusk religion, pomp of solitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Promethean clay by thief endued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By old Saturnus’ forelock, by his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shook with eternal palsy, I did wed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself to things of light from infancy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus to be cast out, thus lorn to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is sure enough to make a mortal man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grow impious.” So he inwardly began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On things for which no wording can be found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deeper and deeper sinking, until drown’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the reach of music: for the choir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Cynthia he heard not, though rough brier</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor muffling thicket interposed to dull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vesper hymn, far swollen, soft and full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the dark pillars of those sylvan aisles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw not the two maidens, nor their smiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wan as primroses gather’d at midnight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By chilly-finger’d spring. “Unhappy wight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion!” said Peona, “we are here!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wouldst thou ere we all are laid on bier?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he embraced her, and his lady’s hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press’d, saying: “Sister, I would have command,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-191"/>
					<span>If it were heaven’s will, on our sad fate.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which that dark-eyed stranger stood elate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, in a new voice, but sweet as love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Endymion’s amaze: “By Cupid’s dove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so thou slialt! and by the lily truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my own breast thou shalt, beloved youth!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as she spake, into her face there came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light, as reflected from a silver flame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her long black hair swell’d ampler, in display</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full golden; in her eyes a brighter day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dawn’d blue, and full of love. Aye, he beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phœbe, his passion! joyous she upheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her lucid bow, continuing thus: ‘Drear, drear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has our delaying been; but foolish fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withheld me first; and then decrees of fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then ’t was fit that from this mortal state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shouldst, my love, by some unlook’d-for change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be spiritualized. Peona, we shall range</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These forests, and to thee they safe shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As was thy cradle; hither shalt thou flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet us many a time.’ Next Cynthia bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona kiss’d, and bless’d with fair good night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her brother kiss’d her too, and knelt adown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before his goddess, in a blissful swoon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gave her fair hands to him, and behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before three swiftest kisses he had told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They vanish’d far away!⁠—Peona went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home through the gloomy wood in wonderment.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
