<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Hyperion</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="hyperion" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="fulltitle">
				<span epub:type="title">Hyperion</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">A Fragment</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="hyperion-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h3>
				<p>
					<span>Deep in the shady sadness of a vale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far sunken from the healthy breath of morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the fiery noon, and eve’s one star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat gray-hair’d Saturn, quiet as a stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still as the silence round about his lair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forest on forest hung about his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like cloud on cloud. No stir of air was there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not so much life as on a summer’s day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Robs not one light seed from the feather’d grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But where the dead leaf fell, there did it rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stream went voiceless by, still deadened more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By reason of his fallen divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spreading a shade: the Naiad ’mid her reeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press’d her cold finger closer to her lips.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Along the margin-sand large foot-marks went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No further than to where his feet had stray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slept there since. Upon the sodden ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His old right hand lay nerveless, listless, dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unsceptred; and his realmless eyes were closed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While his bow’d head seem’d list’ning to the Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ancient mother, for some comfort yet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">It seem’d no force could wake him from his place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there came one, who with a kindred hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touch’d his wide shoulders, after bending low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With reverence, though to one who knew it not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was a Goddess of the infant world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By her in stature the tall Amazon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had stood a pigmy’s height: she would have ta’en</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles by the hair and bent his neck;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-353"/>
					<span>Or with a finger stay’d Ixion’s wheel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her face was large as that of Memphian sphinx,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pedestal’d haply in a palace-court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When sages look’d to Egypt for their lore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But oh! how unlike marble was that face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How beautiful, if sorrow had not made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sorrow more beautiful than Beauty’s self.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a listening fear in her regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if calamity had but begun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the vanward clouds of evil days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had spent their malice, and the sullen rear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was with its stored thunder labouring up.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One hand she press’d upon that aching spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where beats the human heart, as if just there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though an immortal, she felt cruel pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other upon Saturn’s bended neck</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She laid, and to the level of his ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaning with parted lips, some words she spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In solemn tenour and deep organ tone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some mourning words, which in our feeble tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would come in these like accents; O how frail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that large utterance of the early gods!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Saturn, look up!⁠—though wherefore, poor old King?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have no comfort for thee, no not one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot say, “O wherefore sleepest thou?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For heaven is parted from thee, and the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knows thee not, thus afflicted, for a God;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ocean too, with all its solemn noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has from thy sceptre pass’d; and all the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is emptied of thine hoary majesty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy thunder, conscious of the new command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rumbles reluctant o’er our fallen house;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy sharp lightning in unpractised hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scorches and burns our once serene domain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O aching time! O moments big as years!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All as ye pass swell out the monstrous truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And press it so upon our weary griefs</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-354"/>
					<span>That unbelief has not a space to breathe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saturn, sleep on:⁠—O thoughtless, why did I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus violate thy slumbrous solitude?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I ope thy melancholy eyes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saturn, sleep on! while at thy feet I weep.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As when, upon a tranced summer-night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those green-robed senators of mighty woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tall oaks, branch-charmed by the earnest stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dream, and so dream all night without a stir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save from one gradual solitary gust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which comes upon the silence, and dies off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the ebbing air had but one wave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So came these words and went; the while in tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She touch’d her fair large forehead to the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just where her falling hair might be outspread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A soft and silken mat for Saturn’s feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One moon, with alteration slow, had shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her silver seasons four upon the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still these two were postured motionless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like natural sculpture in cathedral cavern;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The frozen God still couchant on the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sad Goddess weeping at his feet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until at length old Saturn lifted up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His faded eyes, and saw his kingdom gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the gloom and sorrow of the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that fair kneeling Goddess; and then spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As with a palsied tongue, and while his beard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shook horrid with such aspen-malady:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘O tender spouse of gold Hyperion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thea, I feel thee ere I see thy face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look up, and let me see our doom in it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look up, and tell me if this feeble shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is Saturn’s; tell me, if thou hear’st the voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Saturn; tell me, if this wrinkling brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naked and bare of its great diadem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peers like the front of Saturn. Who had power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make me desolate? whence came the strength?</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-355"/>
					<span>How was it nurtured to such bursting forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Fate seem’d strangled in my nervous grasp?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it is so; and I am smother’d up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And buried from all godlike exercise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of influence benign on planets pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of admonitions to the winds and seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of peaceful sway above man’s harvesting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all those acts which Deity supreme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth ease its heart of love in.⁠—I am gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away from my own bosom: I have left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My strong identity, my real self,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somewhere between the throne, and where I sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here on this spot of earth. Search, Thea, search!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open thine eyes eterne, and sphere them round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon all space: space starr’d, and lorn of light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Space region’d with life-air, and barren void;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spaces of fire, and all the yawn of hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Search, Thea, search! and tell me if thou seest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A certain shape or shadow, making way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wings or chariot fierce to repossess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A heaven he lost erewhile: it must⁠—it must</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be of ripe progress⁠—Saturn must be King.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, there must be a golden victory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There must be Gods thrown down, and trumpets blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of triumph calm, and hymns of festival</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the gold clouds metropolitan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voices of soft proclaim, and silver stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of strings in hollow shells; and there shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful things made new, for the surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the sky-children; I will give command:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thea! Thea! Thea! where is Saturn!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">This passion lifted him upon his feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made his hands to struggle in the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Druid locks to shake and ooze with sweat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes to fever out, his voice to cease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stood, and heard not Thea’s sobbing deep;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-356"/>
					<span>A little time, and then again he snatch’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Utterance thus:⁠—‘But cannot I create?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cannot I form? Cannot I fashion forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another world, another universe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To overbear and crumble this to nought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is another chaos? Where?’⁠—That word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found way unto Olympus, and made quake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rebel three.⁠—Thea was startled up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her bearing was a sort of hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thus she quick-voiced spake, yet full of awe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘This cheers our fallen house: come to our friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Saturn! come away, and give them heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know the covert, for thence came I hither.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus brief; then with beseeching eyes she went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With backward footing through the shade a space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He follow’d, and she turn’d to lead the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through aged boughs, that yielded like the mist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which eagles cleave upmounting from their nest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Meanwhile in other realms big tears were shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More sorrow like to this, and such like woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too huge for mortal tongue or pen of scribe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Titans fierce, self-hid, or prison-bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groan’d for the old allegiance once more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And listen’d in sharp pain for Saturn’s voice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one of the whole mammoth-brood still kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sov’reignty, and rule, and majesty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blazing Hyperion on his orbed fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still sat, still snuff’d the incense, teeming up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From man to the sun’s God; yet unsecure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as among us mortals omens drear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fright and perplex, so also shudder’d he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not at dog’s howl, or gloom-bird’s hated screech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the familiar visiting of one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the first toll of his passing-bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or prophesyings of the midnight lamp:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But horrors, portion’d to a giant nerve,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-357"/>
					<span>Oft made Hyperion ache. His palace bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bastion’d with pyramids of glowing gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And touch’d with shade of bronzed obelisks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glared a blood-red through all its thousand courts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arches, and domes, and fiery galleries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all its curtains of Aurorian clouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flush’d angerly: while sometimes eagles’ wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unseen before by Gods or wondering men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darken’d the place; and neighing steeds were heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not heard before by Gods or wondering men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also, when he would taste the spicy wreaths,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of incense breathed aloft from sacred hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of sweets, his ample palate took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Savour of poisonous brass and metal sick:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so, when harbour’d in the sleepy west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the full completion of fair day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For rest divine upon exalted couch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slumber in the arms of melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He paced away the pleasant hours of ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With stride colossal, on from hall to hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While far within each aisle and deep recess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His winged minions in close clusters stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amazed and full of fear; like anxious men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who on wide plains gather in panting troops,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When earthquakes jar their battlements and towers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even now while Saturn, roused from icy trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went step for step with Thea through the woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyperion, leaving twilight in the rear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came slope upon the threshold of the west;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, as was wont, his palace-door flew ope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In smoothest silence, save what solemn tubes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blown by the serious Zephyrs, gave of sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wandering sounds, slow-breathed melodies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like a rose in vermeil tint and shape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fragrance soft, and coolness to the eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That inlet to severe magnificence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood full blown, for the God to enter in.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-358"/>
				<p>
					<span>He enter’d, but he enter’d full of wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His flaming robes stream’d out beyond his heels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave a roar, as if of earthly fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That scared away the meek ethereal Hours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made their dove-wings tremble. On he flared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From stately nave to nave, from vault to vault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through bowers of fragrant and enwreathed light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And diamond-paved lustrous long arcades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until he reach’d the great main cupola;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There standing fierce beneath, he stampt his foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the basements deep to the high towers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jarr’d his own golden region: and before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The quavering thunder thereupon had ceased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His voice leapt out, despite of godlike curb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To this result: ‘O dreams of day and night!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O monstrous forms! O effigies of pain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O spectres busy in a cold, cold gloom!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O lank-ear’d Phantoms of black-weeded pools!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why do I know ye? why have I seen ye! why</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is my eternal essence thus distraught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see and to behold these horrors new?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saturn is fallen, am I too to fall?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am I to leave this haven of my rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This cradle of my glory, this soft clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This calm luxuriance of blissful light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These crystalline pavilions, and pure fanes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all my lucent empire? It is left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deserted, void, nor any haunt of mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blaze, the splendour, and the symmetry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>1 cannot see⁠—but darkness, death and darkness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even here, into my centre of repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shady visions come to domineer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Insult, and blind, and stifle up my pomp.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall!⁠—No, by Tellus and her briny robes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the fiery frontier of my realms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will advance a terrible right arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall scare that infant thunderer, rebel Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bid old Saturn take his throne again.’</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-359"/>
					<span>He spake, and ceased, the while a heavier threat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Held struggle with his throat, but came not forth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as in theatres of crowded men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hubbub increases more they call out, ‘Hush!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So at Hyperion’s words the Phantoms pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bestirr’d themselves, thrice horrible and cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the mirror’d level where he stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mist arose, as from a scummy marsh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this, through all his bulk an agony</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crept gradual, from the feet unto the crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a lithe serpent vast and muscular</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making slow way, with head and neck convulsed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From over-strained might. Released, he fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the eastern gates, and full six dewy hours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the dawn in season due should blush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He breathed fierce breath against the sleepy portals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clear’d them of heavy vapours, burst them wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suddenly on the ocean’s chilly streams.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The planet orb of fire, whereon he rode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each day from east to west the heavens through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spun round in sable curtaining of clouds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not therefore veiled quite, blindfold, and hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ever and anon the glancing spheres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Circles, and arcs, and broad-belting colure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glow’d through, and wrought upon the muffling dark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet-shaped lightnings from the nadir deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to the zenith,⁠—hieroglyphics old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which sages and keen-eyed astrologers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then living on the earth, with labouring thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Won from the gaze of many centuries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now lost, save what we find on remnants huge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of stone, or marble swart; their import gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their wisdom long since fled.⁠—Two wings this orb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possess’d for glory, two fair argent wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever exalted at the God’s approach:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-360"/>
					<span>And now, from forth the gloom their plumes immense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose, one by one, till all outspreaded were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While still the dazzling globe maintain’d eclipse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awaiting for Hyperion’s command.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fain would he have commanded, fain took throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bid the day begin, if but for change.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He might not:⁠—No, though a primeval God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sacred seasons might not be disturb’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore the operations of the dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stay’d in their birth, even as here ’t is told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those silver wings expanded sisterly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eager to sail their orb; the porches wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open’d upon the dusk demesnes of night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the bright Titan, phrenzied with new woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unused to bend, by hard compulsion bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spirit to the sorrow of the time:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all along a dismal rack of clouds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the boundaries of day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stretch’d himself in grief and radiance faint.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There as he lay, the Heaven with its stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look’d down on him with pity, and the voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Coelus, from the universal space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus whisper’d low and solemn in his ear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘O brightest of my children dear, earth-born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sky-engendered. Son of Mysteries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All unrevealed even to the powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which met at thy creating; at whose joys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And palpitations sweet, and pleasures soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, Coelus, wonder, how they came and whence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the fruits thereof what shapes they be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distinct, and visible; symbols divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Manifestations of that beauteous life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diffused unseen throughout eternal space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these new-form’d art thou, oh brightest child!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these, thy brethren and the Goddesses!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is sad feud among ye, and rebellion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of son against his sire. I saw him fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-361"/>
					<span>I saw my first-born tumbled from his throne!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me his arms were spread, to me his voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found way from forth the thunders round his head!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pale wox I, and in vapours hid my face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou, too, near such doom? vague fear there is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I have seen my sons most unlike Gods.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divine ye were created, and divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sad demeanour, solemn, undisturb’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unruffled, like high Gods, ye lived and ruled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I behold in you fear, hope, and wrath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Actions of rage and passion; even as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see them, on the mortal world beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In men who die.⁠—This is the grief, O Son!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad sign of ruin, sudden dismay, and fall!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet do thou strive; as thou art capable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou canst move about, an evident God;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And canst oppose to each malignant hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ethereal presence:⁠—I am but a voice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My life is but the life of winds and tides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more than winds and tides can I avail:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou canst.⁠—Be thou therefore in the van</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of circumstance; yea, seize the arrow’s barb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the tense string murmur.⁠—To the earth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there thou wilt find Saturn, and his woes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime I will keep watch on thy bright sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of thy seasons be a careful nurse.’⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere half this region-whisper had come down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyperion arose, and on the stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifted his curved lids, and kept them wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until it ceased; and still he kept them wide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still they were the same bright, patient stars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with a slow incline of his broad breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to a diver in the pearly seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forward he stoop’d over the airy shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plunged all noiseless into the deep night.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<div class="newpage" id="page-362"/>
			<section id="hyperion-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h3>
				<p>
					<span>Just at the self-same beat of Time’s wide wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyperion slid into the rustled air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Saturn gain’d with Thea that sad place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Cybele and the bruised Titans mourn’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a den where no insulting light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could glimmer on their tears; where their own groans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They felt, but heard not, for the solid roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thunderous waterfalls and torrents hoarse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pouring a constant bulk, uncertain where.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crag jutting forth to crag, and rocks that seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever as if just rising from a sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forehead to forehead held their monstrous horns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus in thousand hugest phantasies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made a fit roofing to this nest of woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of thrones, hard flint they sat upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Couches of rugged stone, and slaty ridge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stubborn’d with iron. All were not assembled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some chain’d in torture, and some wandering.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cœus, and Gyges, and Briarcüs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Typhon, and Dolor, and Porphyrion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many more, the brawniest in assault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were pent in regions of laborious breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dungeon’d in opaque element to keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their clenched teeth still clench’d, and all their limbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lock’d up like veins of metal, crampt and screw’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a motion, save of their big hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaving in pain, and horribly convulsed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sanguine, feverous, boiling gurge of pulse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mnemosyne was straying in the world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from her moon had Phœbe wandered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many else were free to roam abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for the main, here found they covert drear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce images of life, one here, one there,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-363"/>
					<span>Lay vast and edgeways; like a dismal cirque</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Druid stones, upon a forlorn moor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the chill rain begins at shut of eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dull November, and their chancel vault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Heaven itself, is blinded throughout night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each one kept shroud, nor to his neighbour gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or word, or look, or action of despair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Creüs was one; his ponderous iron mace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay by him, and a shatter’d rib of rock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Told of his rage, ere he thus sank and pined.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Iapetus another; in his grasp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A serpent’s plashy neck; its barbed tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Squeezed from the gorge, and all its uncurl’d length</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dead; and because the creature could not spit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its poison in the eyes of conquering Jove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next Cottus: prone he lay, chin uppermost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though in pain: for still upon the flint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ground severe his skull, with open mouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eyes at horrid working. Nearest him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asia, born of most enormous Caf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who cost her mother Tellus keener pangs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though feminine, than any of her sons:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More thought than woe was in her dusky face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she was prophesying of her glory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her wide imagination stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Palm-shaded temples, and high rival fanes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Oxus or in Ganges’ sacred isles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as Hope upon her anchor leans,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So leant she, not so fair, upon a tusk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shed from the broadest of her elephants.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above her, on a crag’s uneasy shelve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his elbow raised, all prostrate else,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shadow’d Enceladus; once tame and mild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As grazing ox unworried in the meads;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now tiger-passion’d, lion-thoughted, wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He meditated, plotted, and even now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was hurling mountains in that second war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not long delay’d, that scared the younger Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-364"/>
					<span>To hide themselves in forms of beast and bird.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not far hence Atlas; and beside him prone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phorcus, the sire of Gorgons. Neighbour’d close</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oceanus, and Tethys, in whose lap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sobb’d Clymene among her tangled hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In midst of all lay Themis, at the feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ops the queen all clouded round from sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No shape distinguishable, more than when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thick night confounds the pine-tops with the clouds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many else whose names may not be told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when the Muse’s wings are air-ward spread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who shall delay her flight? And she must chant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Saturn, and his guide, who now had climb’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With damp and slippery footing from a depth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More horrid still. Above a sombre cliff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their heads appear’d, and up their stature grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till on the level height their steps found ease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Thea spread abroad her trembling arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the precincts of this nest of pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And side-long fix’d her eye on Saturn’s face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There saw she direst strife; the supreme God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At war with all the frailty of grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rage, of fear, anxiety, revenge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remorse, spleen, hope, but most of all despair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against these plagues he strove in vain: for Fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had pour’d a mortal oil upon his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A disanointing poison: so that Thea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affrighted, kept her still, and let him pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First onwards in, among the fallen tribe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As with us mortal men, the laden heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is persecuted more, and fever’d more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it is nighing to the mournful house</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where other hearts are sick of the same bruise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Saturn, as he walk’d into the midst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt faint, and would have sunk among the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that he met Enceladus’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-365"/>
					<span>Whose mightiness, and awe of him, at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came like an inspiration; and he shouted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Titans, behold your God!’ at which some groan’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some started on their feet; some also shouted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some wept, some wail’d⁠—all bow’d with reverence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Ops, uplifting her black folded veil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show’d her pale cheeks, and all her forehead wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyebrows thin and jet, and hollow eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a roaring in the bleak-grown pines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Winter lifts his voice; there is a noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among immortals when a God gives sign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hushing finger, how he means to load</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tongue with the full weight of utterless thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thunder, and with music, and with pomp:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such noise is like the roar of bleak-grown pines;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, when it ceases in this mountain’d world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No other sound succeeds; but ceasing here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among these fallen, Saturn’s voice therefrom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew up like organ, that begins anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its strain, when other harmonies, stopt short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave the dinn’d air vibrating silverly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus grew it up:⁠—‘Not in my own sad breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is its own great judge and searcher out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can I find reason why ye should be thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not in the legends of the first of days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Studied from that old spirit-leaved book</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which starry Uranus with finger bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saved from the shores of darkness, when the waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Low-ebb’d still hid it up in shallow gloom;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the which book ye know I ever kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my firm-based footstool:⁠—Ah, infirm!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not there, nor in sign, symbol, or portent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of element, earth, water, air, and fire,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At war, at peace, or inter-quarrelling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One against one, or two, or three, or all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each several one against the other three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fire with air loud warring when rain-floods</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-366"/>
					<span>Drown both, and press them both against earth’s face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, finding sulphur, a quadruple wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unhinges the poor world;⁠—not in that strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefrom I take strange lore, and read it deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can I find reason why ye should be thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, nowhere can unriddle, though I search,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pore on nature’s universal scroll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even to swooning, why ye, Divinities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first-born of all shaped and palpable Gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should cower beneath what, in comparison,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is untremendous might. Yet ye are here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erwhelm’d, and spurn’d, and batter’d, ye are here!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Titans, shall I say “Arise!”⁠—Ye groan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I say “Crouch!”⁠—Ye groan. What can I then?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Heaven wide! O unseen parent dear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What can I? Tell me, all ye brethren Gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How we can war, how engine our great wrath!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O speak your counsel now, for Saturn’s ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is all a-hunger’d. Thou, Oceanus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ponderest high and deep; and in thy face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see, astonied, that severe content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which comes of thought and musing: give us help!’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So ended Saturn; and the God of the Sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sophist and Sage, from no Athenian grove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But cogitation in his watery shades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arose, with locks not oozy, and began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In murmurs, which his first-endeavouring tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caught infant-like from the far-foamed sands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘O ye, whom wrath consumes! who, passion-stung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writhe at defeat, and nurse your agonies!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shut up your senses, stifle up your ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My voice is not a bellows unto ire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet listen, ye who will, whilst I bring proof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How ye, perforce, must be content to stoop;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-367"/>
					<span>And in the proof much comfort will I give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ye will take that comfort in its truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We fall by course of Nature’s law, not force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thunder, or of Jove. Great Saturn, thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has sifted well the atom-universe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for this reason, that thou art the King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only blind from sheer supremacy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One avenue was shaded from thine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which I wander’d to eternal truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And first, as thou wast not the first of powers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So art thou not the last; it cannot be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art not the beginning nor the end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From chaos and parental darkness came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light, the first fruits of that intestine broil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sullen ferment, which for wondrous ends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was ripening in itself. The ripe hour came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with it light, and light engendering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon its own producer, forthwith touch’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whole enormous matter into life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon that very hour, our parentage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Heavens and the Earth, were manifest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thou first-born, and we the giant-race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found ourselves ruling new and beauteous realms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now comes the pain of truth, to whom ’t is pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O folly! for to bear all naked truths,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to envisage circumstance, all calm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is the top of sovereignty. Mark well!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Heaven and Earth are fairer, fairer far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Chaos and blank Darkness, though once chiefs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as we show beyond that Heaven and Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In form and shape compact and beautiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In will, in action free, companionship,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thousand other signs of purer life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So on our heels a fresh perfection treads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A power more strong in beauty, born of us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fated to excel us, as we pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In glory that old Darkness: nor are we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereby more conquer’d, than by us the rule</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-368"/>
					<span>Of shapeless Chaos. Say, doth the dull soil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quarrel with the proud forests it hath fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And feedeth still, more comely than itself?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can it deny the chiefdom of green groves?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or shall the tree be envious of the dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because it cooeth, and hath snowy wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wander wherewithal and find its joys?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are such forest-trees, and our fair boughs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have bred forth, not pale solitary doves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But eagles golden-feather’d, who do tower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above us in their beauty, and must reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In right thereof; for ’tis the eternal law</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That first in beauty should be first in might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, by that law, another race may drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our conquerors to mourn as we do now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have ye beheld the young God of the Seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My dispossessor? Have ye seen his face?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have ye beheld his chariot, foam’d along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By noble winged creatures he hath made?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw him on the calmed waters scud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a glow of beauty in his eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it enforced me to bid sad farewell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all my empire; farewell sad I took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hither came, to see how dolorous fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had wrought upon ye; and how I might best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give consolation in this woe extreme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive the truth and let it be your balm.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Whether through poz’d conviction, or disdain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They guarded silence, when Oceanus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left murmuring, what deepest thought can tell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But so it was, none answer’d for a space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save one whom none regarded, Clymene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet she answer’d not, only complain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hectic lips, and eyes up-looking mild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus wording timidly among the fierce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘O Father, I am here the simplest voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all my knowledge is that joy is gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-369"/>
					<span>And this thing woe crept in among our hearts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There to remain forever, as I fear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would not bode of evil, if I thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So weak a creature could turn off the help</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which by just right should come of mighty Gods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet let me tell my sorrow, let me tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what I heard, and how it made me weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And know that we had parted from all hope.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I stood upon a shore, a pleasant shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where a sweet clime was breathed from a land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fragrance, quietness, and trees, and flowers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of calm joy it was, as I of grief;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too full of joy and soft delicious warmth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that I felt a movement in my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To chide, and to reproach that solitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With songs of misery, music of our woes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sat me down, and took a mouthed shell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And murmur’d into it, and made melody⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O melody no more! for while I sang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with poor skill let pass into the breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dull shell’s echo, from a bowery strand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just opposite, an island of the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came enchantment with the shifting wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That did both drown and keep alive my ears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I threw my shell away upon the sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a wave fill’d it, as my sense was fill’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that new blissful golden melody.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A living death was in each gush of sounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each family of rapturous hurried notes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fell, one after one, yet all at once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like pearl beads dropping sudden from their string:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then another, then another strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each like a dove leaving its olive perch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With music wing’d instead of silent plumes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hover round my head, and make me sick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of joy and grief at once. Grief overcame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I was stopping up my frantic ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, past all hindrance of my trembling hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-370"/>
					<span>A voice came sweeter, sweeter than all tune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still it cried, “Apollo! young Apollo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The morning-bright Apollo! young Apollo!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fled, it follow’d me, and cried, “Apollo!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Father, and O Brethren, had ye felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those pains of mine; O Saturn, hadst thou felt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye would not call this too indulged tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presumptuous, in thus venturing to be heard.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So far her voice flow’d on, like timorous brook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, lingering along a pebbled coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth fear to meet the sea: but sea it met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shudder’d; for the overwhelming voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of huge Enceladus swallow’d it in wrath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ponderous syllables, like sullen waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the half-glutted hollows of reef-rocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came booming thus, while still upon his arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lean’d; not rising, from supreme contempt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Or shall we listen to the over-wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to the over-foolish giant, Gods?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not thunderbolt on thunderbolt, till all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That rebel Jove’s whole armoury were spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not world on world upon these shoulders piled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could agonize me more than baby-words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In midst of this dethronement horrible.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speak! roar! shout! yell! ye sleepy Titans all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do ye forget the blows, the buffets vile?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are ye not smitten by a youngling arm?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost thou forget, sham Monarch of the Waves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy scalding in the seas? What! have I roused</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your spleens with so few simple words as these?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O joy! for now I see ye are not lost:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O joy! for now I see a thousand eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide-glaring for revenge.’⁠—As this he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lifted up his stature vast, and stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still without intermission speaking thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Now ye are flames, I’ll tell you how to burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And purge the ether of our enemies;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-371"/>
					<span>How to feed fierce the crooked stings of fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And singe away the swollen clouds of Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stifling that puny essence in its tent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let him feel the evil he hath done;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though I scorn Oceanus’s lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much pain have I for more than loss of realms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The days of peace and slumberous calm are fled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those days, all innocent of scathing war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all the fair Existences of heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came open-eyed to guess what we would speak:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was before our brows were taught to frown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before our lips knew else but solemn sounds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was before we knew the winged thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Victory, might be lost, or might be won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be ye mindful that Hyperion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our brightest brother, still is undisgraced⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyperion, lo! his radiance is here!’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">All eyes were on Enceladus’s face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they beheld, while still Hyperion’s name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flew from his lips up to the vaulted rocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pallid gleam across his features stern:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not savage, for he saw full many a God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wroth as himself. He look’d upon them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in each face he saw a gleam of light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But splendider in Saturn’s, whose hoar locks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shone like the bubbling foam about a keel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the prow sweeps into a midnight cove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pale and silver silence they remain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till suddenly a splendour, like the morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pervaded all the beetling gloomy steeps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the sad spaces of oblivion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every gulf, and every chasm old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every height, and every sullen depth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voiceless, or hoarse with loud tormented streams:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the everlasting cataracts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the headlong torrents far and near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mantled before in darkness and huge shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-372"/>
					<span>Now saw the light and made it terrible.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was Hyperion:⁠—a granite peak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bright feet touch’d, and there he stay’d to view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The misery his brilliance had betray’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the most hateful seeing of itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Golden his hair of short Numidian curl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Regal his shape majestic, a vast shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In midst of his own brightness, like the bulk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Memnon’s image at the set of sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To one who travels from the dusking East:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighs, too, as mournful as that Memnon’s harp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He utter’d, while his hands contemplative</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He press’d together, and in silence stood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despondence seized again the fallen Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At sight of the dejected King of Day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many hid their faces from the light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fierce Enceladus sent forth his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the brotherhood; and, at their glare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uprose Iäpetus, and Creüs too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Phorcus, sea-born, and together strode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where he tower’d on his eminence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There those four shouted forth old Saturn’s name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyperion from the peak loud answered ‘Saturn!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saturn sat near the Mother of the Gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whose face was no joy, though all the Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave from their hollow throats the name of ‘Saturn!’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="hyperion-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thus in alternate uproar and sad peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amazed were those Titans utterly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O leave them, Muse! O leave them to their woes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou art weak to sing such tumults dire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A solitary sorrow best befits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy lips, and antheming a lonely grief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave them, O Muse! for thou anon wilt find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many a fallen old Divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wandering in vain about bewildered shores.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-373"/>
					<span>Meantime touch piously the Delphic harp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a wind of heaven but will breathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In aid soft warble from the Dorian flute;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For lo! ’tis for the Father of all verse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flush everything that hath a vermeil hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the rose glow intense and warm the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let the clouds of even and of morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Float in voluptuous fleeces o’er the hills;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the red wine within the goblet boil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cold as a bubbling well; let faint-lipp’d shells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On sands or in great deeps, vermilion turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all their labyrinths; and let the maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blush keenly, as with some warm kiss surprised.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chief isle of the embowered Cyclades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rejoice, O Delos, with thine olives green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And poplars, and lawn-shading palms, and beech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which the Zephyr breathes the loudest song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hazels thick, dark-stemm’d beneath the shade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo is once more the golden theme!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where was he, when the Giant of the Sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood bright, amid the sorrow of his peers?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together had he left his mother fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his twin-sister sleeping in their bower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the morning twilight wandered forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the osiers of a rivulet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full ankle-deep in lilies of the vale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nightingale had ceased, and a few stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were lingering in the heavens, while the thrush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began calm-throated. Throughout all the isle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no covert, no retired cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unhaunted by the murmurous noise of waves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though scarcely heard in many a green recess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He listen’d, and he wept, and his bright tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went trickling down the golden bow he held.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus with half-shut suffused eyes he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While from beneath some cumbrous boughs hard by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With solemn step an awful Goddess came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there was purport in her looks for him,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-374"/>
					<span>Which he with eager guess began to read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perplex’d, the while melodiously he said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘How cam’st thou over the uufooted sea?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hath that antique mien and robed form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moved in these vales invisible till now?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sure I have heard those vestments sweeping o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fallen leaves, when I have sat alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In cool mid-forest. Surely I have traced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rustle of those ample skirts about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These grassy solitudes, and seen the flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift up their heads, and still the whisper pass’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goddess! I have beheld those eyes before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their eternal calm, and all that face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or I have dream’d.’⁠—‘Yes,’ said the supreme shape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Thou hast dream’d of me; and awaking up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Didst find a lyre all golden by thy side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose strings touch’d by thy fingers, all the vast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwearied ear of the whole universe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Listen’d in pain and pleasure at the birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such new tuneful wonder. Is ’t not strange</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou shouldst weep, so gifted? Tell me, youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What sorrow thou canst feel; for I am sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou dost shed a tear: explain thy griefs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To one who in this lonely isle hath been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The watcher of thy sleep and hours of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the young day when first thy infant hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pluck’d witless the weak flowers, till thine arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could bend that bow heroic to all times.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show thy heart’s secret to an ancient Power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hath forsaken old and sacred thrones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For prophecies of thee, and for the sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of loveliness new-born.’⁠—Apollo then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sudden scrutiny and gloomless eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus answer’d, while his white melodious throat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throbb’d with the syllables:⁠—‘Mnemosyne!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy name is on my tongue, I know not how;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I tell thee what thou so well seest?</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-375"/>
					<span>Why should I strive to show what from thy lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would come no mystery? For me, dark, dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And painful vile oblivion seals my eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I strive to search wherefore I am so sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until a melancholy numbs my limbs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then upon the grass I sit, and moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one who once had wings.⁠—O why should I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feel cursed and thwarted, when the liegeless air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yields to my step aspirant? why should I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spurn the green turf as hateful to my feet?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goddess benign, point forth some unknown thing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are there not other regions than this isle?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What are the stars? There is the sun, the sun!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the most patient brilliance of the moon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stars by thousands! Point me out the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To any one particular beauteous star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will flit into it with my lyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make its silvery splendour pant with bliss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have heard the cloudy thunder: Where is power?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose hand, whose essence, what divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes this alarum in the elements,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I here idle listen on the shores</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fearless yet in aching ignorance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O tell me, lonely Goddess, by thy harp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That waileth every morn and eventide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me why thus I rave, about these groves!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mute thou remainest⁠—Mute! yet I can read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wondrous lesson in thy silent face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowledge enormous makes a God of me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Names, deeds, gray legends, dire events, rebellions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Majesties, sovran voices, agonies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Creations and destroyings, all at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pour into the wide hollows of my brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deify me, as if some blithe wine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or bright elixir peerless I had drunk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so become immortal.’⁠—Thus the God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While his enkindled eyes, with level glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath his white soft temples, steadfast kept</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-376"/>
					<span>Trembling with light upon Mnemosyne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon wild commotions shook him, and made flush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the immortal fairness of his limbs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most like the struggle at the gate of death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or liker still to one who should take leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of pale immortal death, and with a pang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hot as death’s is chill, with fierce convulse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Die into life: so young Apollo anguish’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His very hair, his golden tresses famed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept undulation round his eager neck.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>During the pain Mnemosyne upheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her arms as one who prophesied.⁠—At length</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo shriek’d;⁠—and lo! from all his limbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Celestial…</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-377"/>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
