<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Poetry</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="imitation-of-spenser" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Imitation of Spenser</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Now Morning from her orient chamber came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her first footsteps touch’d a verdant hill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crowning its lawny crest with amber flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Silv’ring the untainted gushes of its rill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, pure from mossy beds, did down distil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And after parting beds of simple flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By many streams a little lake did fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which round its marge reflected woven bowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in its middle space, a sky that never lowers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">There the kingfisher saw his plumage bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vying with fish of brilliant dye below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose silken fins, and golden scales’ light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast upward, through the waves, a ruby glow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There saw the swan his neck of arched snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And oar’d himself along with majesty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sparkled his jetty eyes; his feet did show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the waves like Afric’s ebony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his back a fay reclined voluptuously.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Ah! could I tell the wonders of an isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in that fairest lake had placed been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I could e’en Dido of her grief beguile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or rob from aged Lear his bitter teen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For sure so fair a place was never seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all that ever charm’d romantic eye:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It seem’d an emerald in the silver sheen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the bright waters; or as when on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through clouds of fleecy white, laughs the cœrulean sky.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And all around it dipp’d luxuriously</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Slopings of verdure through the glossy tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which, as it were in gentle amity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rippled delighted up the flowery side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if to glean the ruddy tears, it tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which fell profusely from the rose-tree stem!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Haply it was the workings of its pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In strife to throw upon the shore a gem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outvying all the buds in Flora’s diadem.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-death" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Death</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Can death be sleep, when life is but a dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scenes of bliss pass as a phantom by?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The transient pleasures as a vision seem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet we think the greatest pain’s to die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How strange it is that man on earth should roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lead a life of woe, but not forsake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His rugged path; nor dare he view alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His future doom, which is but to awake.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-byron" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Byron</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Byron! how sweetly sad thy melody!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Attuning still the soul to tenderness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if soft Pity, with unusual stress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had touch’d her plaintive lute, and thou, being by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hadst caught the tones, nor suffer’d them to die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’ershadowing sorrow doth not make thee less</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Delightful: thou thy griefs dost dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a bright halo, shining beamily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when a cloud the golden moon doth veil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its sides are ting’d with a resplendent glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dark robe oft amber rays prevail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And like fair veins in sable marble flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still warble, dying swan! still tell the tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The enchanting tale, the tale of pleasing woe.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-chatterton" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Chatterton</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O Chatterton! how very sad thy fate!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dear child of sorrow⁠—son of misery!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How soon the film of death obscur’d that eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence Genius mildly flash’d, and high debate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How soon that voice, majestic and elate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melted in dying numbers! Oh! how nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was night to thy fair morning. Thou didst die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A half-blown flow’ret which cold blasts amate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this is past: thou art among the stars</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of highest Heaven: to the rolling spheres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou sweetly singest: nought thy hymning mars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above the ingrate world and human fears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On earth the good man base detraction bars</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From thy fair name, and waters it with tears.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="written-on-the-day-that-mr-leigh-hunt-left-prison" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Written on the Day That <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leigh Hunt Left Prison</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What though, for showing truth to flatter’d state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kind Hunt was shut in prison, yet has he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In his immortal spirit, been as free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the sky-searching lark, and as elate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minion of grandeur! think you he did wait?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Think you he nought but prison-walls did see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till, so unwilling, thou unturn’dst the key?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, no! far happier, nobler was his fate!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Spenser’s halls he strayed, and bowers fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Culling enchanted flowers; and he flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With daring Milton through the fields of air:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To regions of his own his genius true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took happy flights. Who shall his fame impair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When thou art dead, and all thy wretched crew?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-hope" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Hope</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When by my solitary hearth I sit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hateful thoughts enwrap my soul in gloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When no fair dreams before my “mind’s eye” flit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the bare heath of life presents no bloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Sweet Hope, ethereal balm upon me shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And wave thy silver pinions o’er my head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whene’er I wander, at the fall of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where woven boughs shut out the moon’s bright ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should sad Despondency my musings fright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And frown, to drive fair Cheerfulness away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Peep with the moonbeams through the leafy roof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And keep that fiend Despondence far aloof.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Should Disappointment, parent of Despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strive for her son to seize my careless heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, like a cloud, he sits upon the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Preparing on his spell-bound prey to dart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Chase him away, sweet Hope, with visage bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And fright him as the morning frightens night!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whene’er the fate of those I hold most dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tells to my fearful breast a tale of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O bright-eyed Hope, my morbid fancy cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let me awhile thy sweetest comforts borrow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thy heaven-born radiance around me shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And wave thy silver pinions o’er my head!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Should e’er unhappy love my bosom pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From cruel parents, or relentless fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O let me think it is not quite in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sigh out sonnets to the midnight air!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Sweet Hope, ethereal balm upon me shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And wave thy silver pinions o’er my head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the long vista of the years to roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let me not see our country’s honour fade:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O let me see our land retain her soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her pride, her freedom; and not freedom’s shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From thy bright eyes unusual brightness shed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Beneath thy pinions canopy my head!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let me not see the patriot’s high bequest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Great Liberty! how great in plain attire!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the base purple of a court oppress’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bowing her head, and ready to expire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But let me see thee stoop from heaven on wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That fill the skies with silver glitterings!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And as, in sparkling majesty, a star</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gilds the bright summit of some gloomy cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brightening the half-veil’d face of heaven afar:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, when dark thoughts my boding spirit shroud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Sweet Hope, celestial influence round me shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Waving thy silver pinions o’er my head.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ode-to-apollo" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Ode to Apollo</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">In thy western halls of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When thou sittest in thy state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bards, that erst sublimely told</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Heroic deeds, and sang of fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With fervour seize their adamantine lyres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose chords are solid rays, and twinkle radiant fires.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Here Homer with his nervous arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Strikes the twanging harp of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And even the western splendor warms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">While the trumpets sound afar:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, what creates the most intense surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His soul looks out through renovated eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then, through thy Temple wide, melodious swells</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The sweet majestic tone of Maro’s lyre:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The soul delighted on each accent dwells,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Enraptur’d dwells,⁠—not daring to respire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The while he tells of grief around a funeral pyre.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">’Tis awful silence then again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Expectant stand the spheres;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Breathless the laurell’d peers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor move, till ends the lofty strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor move till Milton’s tuneful thunders cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave once more the ravish’d heavens in peace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thou biddest Shakspeare wave his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And quickly forward spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Passions⁠—a terrific band⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And each vibrates the string</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That with its tyrant temper best accords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While from their Master’s lips pour forth the inspiring words.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">A silver trumpet Spenser blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And, as its martial notes to silence flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From a virgin chorus flows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A hymn in praise of spotless Chastity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis still! Wild warblings from the Æolian lyre</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enchantment softly breathe, and tremblingly expire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Next thy Tasso’s ardent numbers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Float along the pleasèd air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calling youth from idle slumbers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Rousing them from Pleasure’s lair:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then o’er the strings his fingers gently move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And melt the soul to pity and to love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But when <em>Thou</em> joinest with the Nine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the powers of song combine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">We listen here on earth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dying tones that fill the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And charm the ear of evening fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thee, Great God of Bards, receive their heavenly birth.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-some-ladies" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Some Ladies</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What though, while the wonders of nature exploring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I cannot your light, mazy footsteps attend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor listen to accents, that almost adoring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bless Cynthia’s face, the enthusiast’s friend:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet over the steep, whence the mountain-stream rushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With you, kindest friends, in idea I rove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mark the clear tumbling crystal, its passionate gushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its spray that the wild flower kindly bedews.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Why linger you so, the wild labyrinth strolling?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why breathless, unable your bliss to declare?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! you list to the nightingale’s tender condoling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Responsive to sylphs, in the moon-beamy air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis morn, and the flowers with dew are yet drooping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see you are treading the verge of the sea:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now! ah, I see it⁠—you just now are stooping</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To pick up the keepsake intended for me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If a cherub, on pinions of silver descending,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had brought me a gem from the fretwork of heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smiles, with his star-cheering voice sweetly blending,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The blessings of Tighe had melodiously given;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It had not created a warmer emotion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than the present, fair nymphs, I was blest with from you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the shell, from the bright golden sands of the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the emerald waves at your feet gladly threw.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For, indeed, ’tis a sweet and peculiar pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(And blissful is he who such happiness finds,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To possess but a span of the hour of leisure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In elegant, pure, and aerial minds.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-receiving-a-curious-shell-and-a-copy-of-verses-from-the-same-ladies" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Receiving a Curious Shell and a Copy of Verses from the Same Ladies</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Hast thou from the caves of Golconda, a gem</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pure as the ice-drop that froze on the mountain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright as the humming-bird’s green diadem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When it flutters in sunbeams that shine through a fountain?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hast thou a goblet for dark sparkling wine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That goblet right heavy, and massy, and gold?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And splendidly mark’d with the story divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Armida the fair, and Rinaldo the bold?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hast thou a steed with a mane richly flowing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hast thou a sword that thine enemy’s smart is?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou a trumpet rich melodies blowing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wear’st thou the shield of the fam’d Britomartis?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What is it that hangs from thy shoulder, so brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Embroidered with many a spring peering flower?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it a scarf that thy fair lady gave?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hastest thou now to that fair lady’s bower?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! courteous Sir Knight, with large joy thou art crown’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full many the glories that brighten thy youth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will tell thee my blisses, which richly abound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In magical powers to bless, and to soothe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On this scroll thou seest written in characters fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A sun-beamy tale of a wreath, and a chain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, warrior, it nurtures the property rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of charming my mind from the trammels of pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This canopy mark: ’tis the work of a fay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath its rich shade did King Oberon languish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When lovely Titania was far, far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cruelly left him to sorrow, and anguish.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There, oft would he bring from his soft-sighing lute</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wild strains to which, spell-bound, the nightingales listen’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wondering spirits of heaven were mute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tears ’mong the dewdrops of morning oft glistened.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In this little dome, all those melodies strange,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Soft, plaintive, and melting, for ever will sigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor e’er will the notes from their tenderness change;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor e’er will the music of Oberon die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, when I am in a voluptuous vein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I pillow my head on the sweets of the rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And list to the tale of the wreath, and the chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till its echoes depart; then I sink to repose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Adieu, valiant Eric! with joy thou art crown’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full many the glories that brighten thy youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I too have my blisses, which richly abound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In magical powers, to bless and to soothe.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="stanzas-to-miss-wylie" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Stanzas to Miss Wylie</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O come, Georgiana! the rose is full blown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The riches of Flora are lavishly strown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The air is all softness, and crystal the streams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The West is resplendently clothed in beams.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O come! let us haste to the freshening shades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The quaintly carv’d seats, and the opening glades;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the faeries are chanting their evening hymns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the last sun-beam the sylph lightly swims.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when thou art weary, I’ll find thee a bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mosses and flowers to pillow thy head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there Georgiana I’ll sit at thy feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While my story of love I enraptur’d repeat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So fondly I’ll breathe, and so softly I’ll sigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt think that some amorous zephyr is nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet no⁠—as I breathe I will press thy fair knee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then thou wilt know that the sigh comes from me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! why, dearest girl, should we lose all these blisses?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That mortal’s a fool who such happiness misses:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So smile acquiescence, and give me thy hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With love-looking eyes, and with voice sweetly bland.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="woman-when-i-behold-thee-flippant-vain" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">“Woman! When I Behold Thee Flippant, Vain”</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Woman! when I behold thee flippant, vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inconstant, childish, proud, and full of fancies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without that modest softening that enhances</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The downcast eye, repentant of the pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That its mild light creates to heal again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">E’en then, elate, my spirit leaps, and prances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">E’en then my soul with exultation dances</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that to love, so long, I’ve dormant lain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when I see thee meek, and kind, and tender,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heavens! how desperately do I adore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy winning graces;⁠—to be thy defender</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I hotly burn⁠—to be a Calidore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A very Red Cross Knight⁠—a stout Leander⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Might I be lov’d by thee like these of yore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Light feet, dark violet eyes, and parted hair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Soft dimpled hands, white neck, and creamy breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are things on which the dazzled senses rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the fond, fixèd eyes forget they stare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From such fine pictures, Heavens! I cannot dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To turn my admiration, though unpossess’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They be of what is worthy,⁠—though not drest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In lovely modesty, and virtues rare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet these I leave as thoughtless as a lark;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These lures I straight forget,⁠—e’en ere I dine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or thrice my palate moisten: but when I mark</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such charms with mild intelligences shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My ear is open like a greedy shark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To catch the tunings of a voice divine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! who can e’er forget so fair a being?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who can forget her half-retiring sweets?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God! she is like a milk-white lamb that bleats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For man’s protection. Surely the All-seeing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who joys to see us with his gifts agreeing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will never give him pinions, who intreats</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such innocence to ruin,⁠—who vilely cheats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dove-like bosom. In truth there is no freeing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One’s thoughts from such a beauty; when I hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lay that once I saw her hand awake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her form seems floating palpable, and near:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had I e’er seen her from an arbour take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dewy flower, oft would that hand appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And o’er my eyes the trembling moisture shake.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To ⸻</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Had I a man’s fair form, then might my sighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be echoed swiftly through that ivory shell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thine ear, and find thy gentle heart; so well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would passion arm me for the enterprise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ah! I am no knight whose foeman dies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No cuirass glistens on my bosom’s swell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I am no happy shepherd of the dell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose lips have trembled with a maiden’s eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet must I dote upon thee,⁠—call thee sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweeter by far than Hybla’s honied roses</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When steep’d in dew rich to intoxication.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! I will taste that dew, for me ’tis meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when the moon her pallid face discloses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I’ll gather some by spells, and incantation.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Sonnet</span>
				<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Happy Is England!</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Happy is England! I could be content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see no other verdure than its own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To feel no other breezes than are blown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through its tall woods with high romances blent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet do I sometimes feel a languishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For skies Italian, and an inward groan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To sit upon an Alp as on a throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And half forget what world or worldling meant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy is England, sweet her artless daughters;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enough their simple loveliness for me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Enough their whitest arms in silence clinging:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet do I often warmly burn to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Beauties of deeper glance, and hear their singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And float with them about the summer waters.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Sonnet</span>
				<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">How Many Bards</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>How many bards gild the lapses of time!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A few of them have ever been the food</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of my delighted fancy,⁠—I could brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over their beauties, earthly, or sublime:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And often, when I sit me down to rhyme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These will in throngs before my mind intrude:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But no confusion, no disturbance rude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do they occasion; ’tis a pleasing chime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the unnumber’d sounds that evening store;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The songs of birds⁠—the whisp’ring of the leaves⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The voice of waters⁠—the great bell that heaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With solemn sound,⁠—and thousand others more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That distance of recognizance bereaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make pleasing music, and not wild uproar.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-first-looking-into-chapmans-homer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On First Looking Into Chapman’s Homer</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Much have I travell’d in the realms of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And many goodly states and kingdoms seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Round many western islands have I been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which bards in fealty to Apollo hold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft of one wide expanse had I been told</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That deep-brow’d Homer ruled as his demesne:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet did I never breathe its pure serene</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then felt I like some watcher of the skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When a new planet swims into his ken;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He star’d at the Pacific⁠—and all his men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look’d at each other with a wild surmise⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Silent, upon a peak in Darien.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="epistle-to-george-felton-mathew" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Epistle to George Felton Mathew</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Sweet are the pleasures that to verse belong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And doubly sweet a brotherhood in song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor can remembrance, Mathew! bring to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fate more pleasing, a delight more true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than that in which the brother Poets joy’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, with combinèd powers, their wit employ’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To raise a trophy to the drama’s muses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thought of this great partnership diffuses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the genius-loving heart, a feeling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all that’s high, and great, and good, and healing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Too partial friend! fain would I follow thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past each horizon of fine poesy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fain would I echo back each pleasant note</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As o’er Sicilian seas, clear anthems float</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mong the light skimming gondolas far parted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just when the sun his farewell beam has darted:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’tis impossible; far different cares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beckon me sternly from soft “Lydian airs,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hold my faculties so long in thrall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I am oft in doubt whether at all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall again see Phœbus in the morning:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or flush’d Aurora in the roseate dawning!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a white Naiad in a rippling stream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a rapt seraph in a moonlight beam;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or again witness what with thee I’ve seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dew by fairy feet swept from the green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After a night of some quaint jubilee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which every elf and fay had come to see:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When bright processions took their airy march</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the curvèd moon’s triumphal arch.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But might I now each passing moment give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the coy Muse, with me she would not live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this dark city, nor would condescend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mid contradictions her delights to lend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should e’er the fine-eyed maid to me be kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! surely it must be whene’er I find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some flowery spot, sequester’d, wild, romantic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That often must have seen a poet frantic;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where oaks, that erst the Druid knew, are growing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flowers, the glory of one day, are blowing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the dark-leav’d laburnum’s drooping clusters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reflect athwart the stream their yellow lustres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And intertwined the cassia’s arms unite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its own drooping buds, but very white.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where on one side are covert branches hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mong which the nightingales have always sung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In leafy quiet: where to pry, aloof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Atween the pillars of the sylvan roof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would be to find where violet beds were nestling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where the bee with cowslip bells was wrestling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There must be too a ruin dark and gloomy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To say “Joy not too much in all that’s bloomy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Yet this is vain⁠—O Mathew, lend thy aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find a place where I may greet the maid⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where we may soft humanity put on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sit, and rhyme and think on Chatterton;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that warm-hearted Shakspeare sent to meet him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four laurell’d spirits, heavenward to entreat him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With reverence would we speak of all the sages</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who have left streaks of light athwart their ages:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shouldst moralize on Milton’s blindness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mourn the fearful dearth of human kindness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To those who strove with the bright golden wing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of genius, to flap away each sting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrown by the pitiless world. We next could tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those who in the cause of freedom fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our own Alfred, of Helvetian Tell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him whose name to ev’ry heart’s a solace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-minded and unbending William Wallace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While to the rugged north our musing turns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We well might drop a tear for him, and Burns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Felton! without incitements such as these.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How vain for me the niggard Muse to tease:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thee, she will thy every dwelling grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make “a sunshine in a shady place:”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou wast once a flow’ret blooming wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to the source, bright, pure, and undefil’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence gush the streams of song: in happy hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came chaste Diana from her shady bower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as the sun was from the east uprising;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as for him some gift she was devising,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld thee, pluck’d thee, cast thee in the stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet her glorious brother’s greeting beam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I marvel much that thou hast never told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How, from a flower, into a fish of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apollo chang’d thee: how thou next didst seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A black-ey’d swan upon the widening stream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when thou first didst in that mirror trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The placid features of a human face:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou hast never told thy travels strange,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the wonders of the mazy range</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er pebbly crystal, and o’er golden sands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kissing thy daily food from Naiads’ pearly hands.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="specimen-of-an-induction-to-a-poem" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Specimen of an Induction to a Poem</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Lo! I must tell a tale of chivalry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For large white plumes are dancing in mine eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not like the formal crest of latter days:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But bending in a thousand graceful ways;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So graceful, that it seems no mortal hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or e’en the touch of Archimago’s wand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could charm them into such an attitude.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We must think rather, that in playful mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some mountain breeze had turned its chief delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show this wonder of its gentle might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! I must tell a tale of chivalry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For while I muse, the lance points slantingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Athwart the morning air; some lady sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who cannot feel for cold her tender feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the worn top of some old battlement</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hails it with tears, her stout defender sent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from her own pure self no joy dissembling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wraps round her ample robe with happy trembling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes, when the good Knight his rest would take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is reflected, clearly, in a lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the young ashen boughs, ’gainst which it rests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And th’ half-seen mossiness of linnets’ nests.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! shall I ever tell its cruelty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the fire flashes from a warrior’s eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his tremendous hand is grasping it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his dark brow for very wrath is knit?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when his spirit, with more calm intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaps to the honours of a tournament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes the gazers round about the ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stare at the grandeur of the balancing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, no! this is far off:⁠—then how shall I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revive the dying tones of minstrelsy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which linger yet about long gothic arches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dark green ivy, and among wild larches?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How sing the splendour of the revelries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When butts of wine are drunk off to the lees?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that bright lance, against the fretted wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the shade of stately banneral,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is slung with shining cuirass, sword, and shield?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where ye may see a spur in bloody field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light-footed damsels move with gentle paces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round the wide hall, and show their happy faces;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or stand in courtly talk by fives and sevens:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like those fair stars that twinkle in the heavens.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet must I tell a tale of chivalry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wherefore comes that knight so proudly by?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore more proudly does the gentle knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rein in the swelling of his ample might?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spenser! thy brows are archèd, open, kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And come like a clear sunrise to my mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And always does my heart with pleasure dance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I think on thy noble countenance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where never yet was ought more earthly seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the pure freshness of thy laurels green.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore, great bard, I not so fearfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call on thy gentle spirit to hover nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My daring steps: or if thy tender care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus startled unaware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be jealous that the foot of other wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should madly follow that bright path of light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trac’d by thy lov’d Libertas; he will speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell thee that my prayer is very meek;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I will follow with due reverence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And start with awe at mine own strange pretence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him thou wilt hear; so I will rest in hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see wide plains, fair trees, and lawny slope:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The morn, the eve, the light, the shade, the flowers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear streams, smooth lakes, and overlooking towers.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="calidore" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Calidore</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">A Fragment</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Young Calidore is paddling o’er the lake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His healthful spirit eager and awake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feel the beauty of a silent eve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which seem’d full loth this happy world to leave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light dwelt o’er the scene so lingeringly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bares his forehead to the cool blue sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smiles at the far clearness all around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until his heart is well nigh over wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turns for calmness to the pleasant green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of easy slopes, and shadowy trees that lean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So elegantly o’er the waters’ brim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And show their blossoms trim.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce can his clear and nimble eyesight follow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The freaks and dartings of the black-wing’d swallow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delighting much, to see it half at rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dip so refreshingly its wings, and breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Gainst the smooth surface, and to mark anon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The widening circles into nothing gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And now the sharp keel of his little boat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes up with ripple, and with easy float,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glides into a bed of water-lilies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad-leav’d are they, and their white canopies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are upward turn’d to catch the heavens’ dew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near to a little island’s point they grew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence Calidore might have the goodliest view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this sweet spot of earth. The bowery shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went off in gentle windings to the hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And light blue mountains: but no breathing man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a warm heart, and eye prepared to scan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature’s clear beauty, could pass lightly by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Objects that look’d out so invitingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either side. These, gentle Calidore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greeted, as he had known them long before.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The sidelong view of swelling leafiness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which the glad setting sun in gold doth dress;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence, ever and anon, the jay outsprings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scales upon the beauty of its wings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The lonely turret, shatter’d, and outworn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands venerably proud; too proud to mourn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its long lost grandeur: fir-trees grow around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aye dropping their hard fruit upon the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The little chapel, with the cross above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upholding wreaths of ivy; the white dove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That on the windows spreads his feathers light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seems from purple clouds to wing its flight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Green tufted islands casting their soft shades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the lake; sequester’d leafy glades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That through the dimness of their twilight show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large dock-leaves, spiral foxgloves, or the glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the cat’s wild eyes, or the silvery stems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of delicate birch-trees, or long grass which hems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little brook. The youth had long been viewing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These pleasant things, and heaven was bedewing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mountain flowers, when his glad senses caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A trumpet’s silver voice. Ah! it was fraught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many joys for him: the warder’s ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had found white coursers prancing in the glen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friends very dear to him he soon will see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So pushes off his boat most eagerly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soon upon the lake he skims along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deaf to the nightingale’s first under-song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor minds he the white swans that dream so sweetly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spirit flies before him so completely.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And now he turns a jutting point of land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence may be seen the castle gloomy, and grand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will a bee buzz round two swelling peaches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the point of his light shallop reaches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those marble steps that through the water dip:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now over them he goes with hasty trip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scarcely stays to ope the folding doors:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon he leaps along the oaken floors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of halls and corridors.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Delicious sounds! those little bright-eyed things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That float about the air on azure wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been less heartfelt by him than the clang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of clattering hoofs; into the court he sprang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as two noble steeds, and palfreys twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were slanting out their necks with loosen’d rein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While from beneath the threat’ning portcullis</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They brought their happy burthens. What a kiss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What gentle squeeze he gave each lady’s hand!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How tremblingly their delicate ankles spann’d!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into how sweet a trance his soul was gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While whisperings of affection</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made him delay to let their tender feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come to the earth; with an incline so sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their low palfreys o’er his neck they bent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whether there were tears of languishment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or that the evening dew had pearl’d their tresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He feels a moisture on his cheek, and blesses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lips that tremble, and with glistening eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the soft luxury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That nestled in his arms. A dimpled hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair as some wonder out of fairy land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung from his shoulder like the drooping flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of whitest Cassia, fresh from summer showers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this he fondled with his happy cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if for joy he would no further seek;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the kind voice of good Sir Clerimond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to his ear, like something from beyond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His present being: so he gently drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His warm arms, thrilling now with pulses new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their sweet thrall, and forward gently bending,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thank’d Heaven that his joy was never ending;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While ’gainst his forehead he devoutly press’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hand Heaven made to succour the distress’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hand that from the world’s bleak promontory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had lifted Calidore for deeds of glory.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Amid the pages, and the torches’ glare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There stood a knight, patting the flowing hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his proud horse’s mane: he was withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man of elegance, and stature tall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that the waving of his plumes would be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High as the berries of a wild ash-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or as the wingèd cap of Mercury.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His armour was so dexterously wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shape, that sure no living man had thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It hard, and heavy steel: but that indeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was some glorious form, some splendid weed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which a spirit new come from the skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might live, and show itself to human eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis the far-fam’d, the brave Sir Gondibert,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said the good man to Calidore alert;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the young warrior with a step of grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came up,⁠—a courtly smile upon his face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mailèd hand held out, ready to greet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The large-eyed wonder, and ambitious heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the aspiring boy; who as he led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those smiling ladies, often turned his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To admire the visor arched so gracefully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over a knightly brow; while they went by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lamps that from the high-roof’d hall were pendent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave the steel a shining quite transcendent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Soon in a pleasant chamber they are seated;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweet-lipp’d ladies have already greeted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the green leaves that round the window clamber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show their purple stars, and bells of amber.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Gondibert has doff’d his shining steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladdening in the free, and airy feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a light mantle; and while Clerimond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is looking round about him with a fond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And placid eye, young Calidore is burning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear of knightly deeds, and gallant spurning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all unworthiness; and how the strong of arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept off dismay, and terror, and alarm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From lovely woman; while brimful of this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave each damsel’s hand so warm a kiss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had such manly ardour in his eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That each at other look’d half-staringly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then their features started into smiles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet as blue heavens o’er enchanted isles.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Softly the breezes from the forest came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Softly they blew aside the taper’s flame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear was the song from Philomel’s far bower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grateful the incense from the lime-tree flower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mysterious, wild, the far heard trumpet’s tone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lovely the moon in ether, all alone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet too the converse of these happy mortals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As that of busy spirits when the portals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are closing in the west; or that soft humming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We hear around when Hesperus is coming.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet be their sleep. …</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To ⸻</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Hadst thou liv’d in days of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O what wonders had been told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy lively countenance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy humid eyes that dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the midst of their own brightness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the very fane of lightness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over which thine eyebrows, leaning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Picture out each lovely meaning:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a dainty bend they lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to streaks across the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the feathers from a crow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fallen on a bed of snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy dark hair, that extends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into many graceful bends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the leaves of Hellebore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turn to whence they sprung before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And behind each ample curl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peeps the richness of a pearl.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Downward too flows many a tress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a glossy waviness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full, and round like globes that rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the censer to the skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through sunny air. Add, too, the sweetness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy honied voice; the neatness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thine ankle lightly turn’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With those beauties scarce discern’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept with such sweet privacy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they seldom meet the eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the little loves that fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round about with eager pry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saving when, with freshening lave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou dipp’st them in the taintless wave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like twin water-lilies, born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the coolness of the morn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, if thou hadst breathèd then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the Muses had been ten.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Couldst thou wish for lineage higher</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than twin-sister of Thalia?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At least for ever, evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will I call the Graces four.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hadst thou liv’d when chivalry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifted up her lance on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me what thou wouldst have been?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! I see the silver sheen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy broider’d, floating vest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cov’ring half thine ivory breast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, O heavens! I should see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that cruel destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has plac’d a golden cuirass there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keeping secret what is fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like sunbeams in a cloudlet nested</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy locks in knightly casque are rested:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er which bend four milky plumes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the gentle lily’s blooms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Springing from a costly vase.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See with what a stately pace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes thine alabaster steed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Servant of heroic deed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er his loins his trappings glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the northern lights on snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mount his back! thy sword unsheath!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sign of the enchanter’s death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bane of every wicked spell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silencer of dragon’s yell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! thou this wilt never do:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art an enchantress too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wilt surely never spill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood of those whose eyes can kill.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-g-a-w" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To <abbr class="name">G. A. W.</abbr></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Nymph of the downward smile and sidelong glance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In what diviner moments of the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Art thou most lovely? When gone far astray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the labyrinths of sweet utterance?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when serenely wand’ring in a trance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of sober thought? Or when starting away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With careless robe, to meet the morning ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou spar’st the flowers in thy mazy dance?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haply ’tis when thy ruby lips part sweetly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so remain, because thou listenest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou to please wert nurtured so completely</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I can never tell what mood is best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall as soon pronounce which Grace more neatly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trips it before Apollo than the rest.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Sonnet</span>
				<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">As from the Darkening Gloom</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>As from the darkening gloom a silver dove</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upsoars, and darts into the eastern light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On pinions that nought moves but pure delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fled thy soul into the realms above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Regions of peace and everlasting love;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where happy spirits, crown’d with circlets bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of starry beam, and gloriously bedight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taste the high joy none but the blest can prove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There thou or joinest the immortal quire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In melodies that even heaven fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill with superior bliss, or, at desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the omnipotent Father, cleav’st the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On holy message sent⁠—What pleasure’s higher?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherefore does any grief our joy impair?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-a-picture-of-leander" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On a Picture of Leander</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Come hither, all sweet maidens soberly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Down-looking aye, and with a chasten’d light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hid in the fringes of your eyelids white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And meekly let your fair hands joined be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if so gentle that ye could not see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Untouch’d, a victim of your beauty bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sinking away to his young spirit’s night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sinking bewilder’d ’mid the dreary sea:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis young Leander toiling to his death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nigh swooning, he doth purse his weary lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For Hero’s cheek, and smiles against her smile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O horrid dream! see how his body dips</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Dead-heavy; arms and shoulders gleam awhile:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s gone; up bubbles all his amorous breath!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Sonnet</span>
				<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Oh! How I Love</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Oh! how I love, on a fair summer’s eve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When streams of light pour down the golden west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on the balmy zephyrs tranquil rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver clouds, far⁠—far away to leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All meaner thoughts, and take a sweet reprieve</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From little cares; to find, with easy quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fragrant wild, with Nature’s beauty drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there into delight my soul deceive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There warm my breast with patriotic lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Musing on Milton’s fate⁠—on Sydney’s bier⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till their stern forms before my mind arise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps on wings of Poesy upsoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full often dropping a delicious tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When some melodious sorrow spells mine eyes.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-to-solitude" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Sonnet to Solitude</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O Solitude! if I must with thee dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let it not be among the jumbled heap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of murky buildings; climb with me the steep,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature’s observatory,⁠—whence the dell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its flowery slopes, its river’s crystal swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May seem a span; let me thy vigils keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mongst boughs pavilion’d, where the deer’s swift leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Startles the wild bee from the foxglove bell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But though I’ll gladly trace these scenes with thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet the sweet converse of an innocent mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose words are images of thoughts refin’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is my soul’s pleasure; and it sure must be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Almost the highest bliss of human-kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When to thy haunts two kindred spirits flee.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Sonnet</span>
				<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">To One Who Has Long in City Pent</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>To one who has been long in city pent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis very sweet to look into the fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And open face of heaven,⁠—to breathe a prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full in the smile of the blue firmament.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is more happy, when, with hearts content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fatigued he sinks into some pleasant lair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of wavy grass, and reads a debonair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gentle tale of love and languishment?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Returning home at evening, with an ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Catching the notes of Philomel,⁠—an eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watching the sailing cloudlet’s bright career,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He mourns that day so soon has glided by:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en like the passage of an angel’s tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That falls through the clear ether silently.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-young-lady-who-sent-me-a-laurel-crown" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To a Young Lady Who Sent Me a Laurel Crown</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Fresh morning gusts have blown away all fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From my glad bosom,⁠—now from gloominess</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I mount for ever⁠—not an atom less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the proud laurel shall content my bier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No! by the eternal stars! or why sit here</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the Sun’s eye, and ’gainst my temples press</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Apollo’s very leaves, woven to bless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thy white fingers and thy spirit clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! who dares say, “Do this?” Who dares call down</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My will from its high purpose? Who say, “Stand,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or “Go?” This mighty moment I would frown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On abject Caesars⁠—not the stoutest band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mailèd heroes should tear off my crown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet would I kneel and kiss thy gentle hand!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-friend-who-sent-me-some-roses" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To a Friend Who Sent Me Some Roses</h2>
			<p>
				<span>As late I rambled in the happy fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What time the skylark shakes the tremulous dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From his lush clover covert; when anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adventurous knights take up their dinted shields:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw the sweetest flower wild nature yields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fresh-blown musk-rose; ’twas the first that threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its sweets upon the summer: graceful it grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As is the wand that Queen Titania wields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as I feasted on its fragrancy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I thought the garden-rose it far excell’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when, O Wells! thy roses came to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My sense with their deliciousness was spell’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft voices had they, that with tender plea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whisper’d of peace, and truth, and friendliness unquell’d.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-my-brother-george" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To My Brother George</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Many the wonders I this day have seen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sun, when first he kist away the tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That fill’d the eyes of morn;⁠—the laurell’d peers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who from the feathery gold of evening lean;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ocean with its vastness, its blue green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its ships, its rocks, its caves, its hopes, its fears,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its voice mysterious, which whoso hears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must think on what will be, and what has been.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en now, dear George, while this for you I write,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cynthia is from her silken curtains peeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So scantly, that it seems her bridal night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she her half-discover’d revels keeping.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what, without the social thought of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would be the wonders of the sky and sea?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="epistle-to-my-brother-george" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Epistle to My Brother George</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Full many a dreary hour have I past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My brain bewilder’d, and my mind o’ercast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With heaviness; in seasons when I’ve thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No spherey strains by me could e’er be caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the blue dome, though I to dimness gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the far depth where sheeted lightning plays;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, on the wavy grass outstretch’d supinely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pry ’mong the stars, to strive to think divinely:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should never hear Apollo’s song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though feathery clouds were floating all along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purple west, and, two bright streaks between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The golden lyre itself were dimly seen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the still murmur of the honey bee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would never teach a rural song to me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the bright glance from beauty’s eyelids slanting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would never make a lay of mine enchanting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or warm my breast with ardour to unfold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some tale of love and arms in time of old.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But there are times, when those that love the bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fly from all sorrowing far, far away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sudden glow comes on them, nought they see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In water, earth, or air, but poesy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It has been said, dear George, and true I hold it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For knightly Spenser to Libertas told it,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That when a Poet is in such a trance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In air he sees white coursers paw and prance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestridden of gay knights, in gay apparel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who at each other tilt in playful quarrel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what we, ignorantly, sheet-lightning call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the swift opening of their wide portal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the bright warder blows his trumpet clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose tones reach nought on earth but Poet’s ear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When these enchanted portals open wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And through the light the horsemen swiftly glide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Poet’s eye can reach those golden halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And view the glory of their festivals:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their ladies fair, that in the distance seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fit for the silv’ring of a seraph’s dream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their rich brimm’d goblets, that incessant run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the bright spots that move about the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when upheld, the wine from each bright jar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pours with the lustre of a falling star.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet further off are dimly seen their bowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which no mortal eye can reach the flowers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’tis right just, for well Apollo knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twould make the Poet quarrel with the rose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that’s reveal’d from that far seat of blisses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is, the clear fountains’ interchanging kisses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As gracefully descending, light and thin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like silver streaks across a dolphin’s fin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he upswimmeth from the coral caves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sports with half his tail above the waves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">These wonders strange he sees, and many more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose head is pregnant with poetic lore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should he upon an evening ramble fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With forehead to the soothing breezes bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would he nought see but the dark, silent blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all its diamonds trembling through and through?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the coy moon, when in the waviness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of whitest clouds she does her beauty dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And staidly paces higher up, and higher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a sweet nun in holiday attire?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, yes! much more would start into his sight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The revelries, and mysteries of night:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And should I ever see them, I will tell you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such tales as needs must with amazement spell you.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">These are the living pleasures of the bard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But richer far posterity’s award.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What does he murmur with his latest breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his proud eye looks through the film of death?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What though I leave this dull and earthly mould</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet shall my spirit lofty converse hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With after times.⁠—The patriot shall feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My stern alarum, and unsheath his steel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in the senate thunder out my number</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To startle princes from their easy slumber.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sage will mingle with each moral theme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My happy thoughts sententious; he will teem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lofty periods when my verses fire him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then I’ll stoop from heaven to inspire him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lays have I left of such a dear delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That maids will sing them on their bridal night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gay villagers, upon a morn of May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they have tired their gentle limbs with play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And form’d a snowy circle on the grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plac’d in midst of all that lovely lass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who chosen is their queen,⁠—with her fine head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crownèd with flowers purple, white, and red.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there the lily, and the musk-rose, sighing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are emblems true of hapless lovers dying;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between her breasts, that never yet felt trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bunch of violets full blown, and double,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serenely sleep:⁠—she from a casket takes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little book,⁠—and then a joy awakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About each youthful heart,⁠—with stifled cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rubbing of white hands, and sparkling eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she’s to read a tale of hopes and fears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One that I foster’d in my youthful years:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pearls, that on each glist’ning circlet sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gush ever and anon with silent creep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lured by the innocent dimples. To sweet rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall the dear babe, upon its mother’s breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be lull’d with songs of mine. Fair world, adieu!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy dales and hills are falling from my view:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiftly I mount, upon wide-spreading pinions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from the narrow bounds of thy dominions.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full joy I feel, while thus I cleave the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That my soft verse will charm thy daughters fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And warm thy sons!” Ah, my dear friend and brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could I, at once, my mad ambition smother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For tasting joys like these, sure I should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happier, and dearer to society.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At times, ’tis true, I’ve felt relief from pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When some bright thought has darted through my brain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all that day I’ve felt a greater pleasure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than if I’d brought to light a hidden treasure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to my sonnets, though none else should heed them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feel delighted, still, that you should read them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of late, too, I have had much calm enjoyment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretch’d on the grass at my best lov’d employment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of scribbling lines for you. These things I thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, in my face, thy freshest breeze I caught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en now I’m pillow’d on a bed of flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That crowns a lofty cliff, which proudly towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the ocean waves. The stalks and blades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chequer my tablet with their quivering shades.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one side is a field of drooping oats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through which the poppies show their scarlet coats;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So pert and useless, that they bring to mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scarlet coats that pester human-kind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the other side, outspread, is seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ocean’s blue mantle, streak’d with purple, and green;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now ’tis I see a canvass’d ship, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mark the bright silver curling round her prow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see the lark down-dropping to his nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the broad-winged sea-gull never at rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when no more he spreads his feathers free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His breast is dancing on the restless sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I direct my eyes into the west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which at this moment is in sunbeams drest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why westward turn? ’Twas but to say adieu!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas but to kiss my hand, dear George, to you!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="epistle-to-charles-cowden-clarke" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Epistle to Charles Cowden Clarke</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Oft have you seen a swan superbly frowning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with proud breast his own white shadow crowning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slants his neck beneath the waters bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So silently, it seems a beam of light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come from the galaxy: anon he sports,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With outspread wings the Naiad Zephyr courts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ruffles all the surface of the lake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In striving from its crystal face to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some diamond water-drops, and them to treasure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In milky nest, and sip them off at leisure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not a moment can he there insure them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor to such downy rest can he allure them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For down they rush as though they would be free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drop like hours into eternity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just like that bird am I in loss of time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whene’er I venture on the stream of rhyme;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shatter’d boat, oar snapt, and canvas rent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I slowly sail, scarce knowing my intent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still scooping up the water with my fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which a trembling diamond never lingers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">By this, friend Charles, you may full plainly see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why I have never penn’d a line to thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because my thoughts were never free, and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And little fit to please a classic ear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because my wine was of too poor a savour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one whose palate gladdens in the flavour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sparkling Helicon:⁠—small good it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take him to a desert rude, and bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had on Baiæ’s shore reclin’d at ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Tasso’s page was floating in a breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gave soft music from Armida’s bowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingled with fragrance from her rarest flowers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Small good to one who had by Mulla’s stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fondled the maidens with the breasts of cream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had beheld Belphœbe in a brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lovely Una in a leafy nook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Archimago leaning o’er his book:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had of all that’s sweet tasted, and seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From silv’ry ripple, up to beauty’s queen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the sequester’d haunts of gay Titania,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the blue dwelling of divine Urania:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One, who of late had ta’en sweet forest walks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With him who elegantly chats and talks⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wrong’d Libertas,⁠—who has told you stories</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of laurel chaplets, and Apollo’s glories;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of troops chivalrous prancing through a city,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tearful ladies made for love, and pity:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many else which I have never known.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus have I thought; and days on days have flown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly, or rapidly⁠—unwilling stilly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For you to try my dull, unlearned quill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor should I now, but that I’ve known you long;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you first taught me all the sweets of song:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grand, the sweet, the terse, the free, the fine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What swell’d with pathos, and what right divine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spenserian vowels that elope with ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And float along like birds o’er summer seas:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Miltonian storms, and more, Miltonian tenderness:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Michael in arms, and more, meek Eve’s fair slenderness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who read for me the sonnet swelling loudly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to its climax, and then dying proudly?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who found for me the grandeur of the ode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Growing, like Atlas, stronger from its load?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who let me taste that more than cordial dram,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sharp, the rapier-pointed epigram?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Show’d me that epic was of all the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round, vast, and spanning all, like Saturn’s ring?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You too upheld the veil from Clio’s beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pointed out the patriot’s stern duty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The might of Alfred, and the shaft of Tell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hand of Brutus, that so grandly fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a tyrant’s head. Ah! had I never seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or known your kindness, what might I have been?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What my enjoyments in my youthful years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bereft of all that now my life endears?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And can I e’er these benefits forget?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And can I e’er repay the friendly debt?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, doubly no;⁠—yet should these rhymings please,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall roll on the grass with twofold ease;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I have long time been my fancy feeding</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hopes that you would one day think the reading</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my rough verses not an hour misspent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should it e’er be so, what a rich content!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some weeks have pass’d since last I saw the spires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In lucent Thames reflected:⁠—warm desires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see the sun o’er-peep the eastern dimness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And morning shadows streaking into slimness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the lawny fields, and pebbly water;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mark the time as they grow broad, and shorter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feel the air that plays about the hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sips its freshness from the little rills;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see high, golden corn wave in the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Cynthia smiles upon a summer’s night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And peers among the cloudlet’s jet and white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though she were reclining in a bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bean blossoms, in heaven freshly shed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sooner had I stepp’d into these pleasures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than I began to think of rhymes and measures;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The air that floated by me seem’d to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Write! thou wilt never have a better day.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so I did. When many lines I’d written,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though with their grace I was not oversmitten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, as my hand was warm, I thought I’d better</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trust to my feelings, and write you a letter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such an attempt required an inspiration</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a peculiar sort,⁠—a consummation;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, had I felt, these scribblings might have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Verses from which the soul would never wean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But many days have past since last my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was warm’d luxuriously by divine Mozart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Arne delighted, or by Handel madden’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or by the song of Erin pierc’d and sadden’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time you were before the music sitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the rich notes to each sensation fitting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since I have walk’d with you through shady lanes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That freshly terminate in open plains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And revell’d in a chat that ceasèd not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When at night-fall among your books we got:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, nor when supper came, nor after that,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor when reluctantly I took my hat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, nor till cordially you shook my hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid-way between our homes:⁠—your accents bland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still sounded in my ears, when I no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could hear your footsteps touch the grav’ly floor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes I lost them, and then found again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You changed the foot-path for the grassy plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In those still moments I have wish’d you joys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That well you know to honour:⁠—“Life’s very toys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With him,” said I, “will take a pleasant charm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It cannot be that ought will work him harm.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These thoughts now come o’er me with all their might:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again I shake your hand⁠—friend Charles, good night.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-6" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Sonnet</span>
				<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Keen, Fitful Gusts Are Whisp’ring</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Keen, fitful gusts are whisp’ring here and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Among the bushes half leafless, and dry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stars look very cold about the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I have many miles on foot to fare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet feel I little of the cool bleak air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or of the dead leaves rustling drearily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or of those silver lamps that burn on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or of the distance from home’s pleasant lair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I am brimful of the friendliness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That in a little cottage I have found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fair-hair’d Milton’s eloquent distress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all his love for gentle Lycid drown’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lovely Laura in her light green dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And faithful Petrarch gloriously crown’d.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-leaving-some-friends-at-an-early-hour" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Leaving Some Friends at an Early Hour</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Give me a golden pen, and let me lean</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On heap’d-up flowers, in regions clear and far;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bring me a tablet whiter than a star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hand of hymning angel, when ’tis seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver strings of heavenly harp atween:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And let there glide by many a pearly car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pink robes, and wavy hair, and diamond jar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And half-discover’d wings, and glances keen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The while let music wander round my ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as it reaches each delicious ending,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Let me write down a line of glorious tone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And full of many wonders of the spheres:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For what a height my spirit is contending!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">’Tis not content so soon to be alone.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-my-brothers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To My Brothers</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Small, busy flames play through the fresh-laid coals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And their faint cracklings o’er our silence creep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like whispers of the household gods that keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gentle empire o’er fraternal souls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And while, for rhymes, I search around the poles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your eyes are fix’d, as in poetic sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the lore so voluble and deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That aye at fall of night our care condoles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is your birth-day, Tom, and I rejoice</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thus it passes smoothly, quietly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many such eves of gently whisp’ring noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May we together pass, and calmly try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What are this world’s true joys,⁠—ere the great Voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From its fair face, shall bid our spirits fly.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="addressed-to-benjamin-robert-haydon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Addressed to Benjamin Robert Haydon</h2>
			<section id="addressed-to-benjamin-robert-haydon-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Great spirits now on earth are sojourning;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He of the cloud, the cataract, the lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who on Helvellyn’s summit, wide awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Catches his freshness from Archangel’s wing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He of the rose, the violet, the spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The social smile, the chain for Freedom’s sake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lo!⁠—whose steadfastness would never take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A meaner sound than Raphael’s whispering.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And other spirits there are standing apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the forehead of the age to come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These, these will give the world another heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And other pulses. Hear ye not the hum</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mighty workings in the human mart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Listen awhile ye nations, and be dumb.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="addressed-to-benjamin-robert-haydon-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Highmindedness, a jealousy for good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A loving-kindness for the great man’s fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dwells here and there with people of no name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In noisome alley, and in pathless wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where we think the truth least understood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft may be found a “singleness of aim,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ought to frighten into hooded shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A money-mong’ring, pitiable brood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How glorious this affection for the cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of steadfast genius, toiling gallantly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What when a stout unbending champion awes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Envy, and Malice to their native sty?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unnumber’d souls breathe out a still applause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud to behold him in his country’s eye.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="written-in-disgust-of-vulgar-superstition" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Written in Disgust of Vulgar Superstition</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The church bells toll a melancholy round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Calling the people to some other prayers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some other gloominess, more dreadful cares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More hearkening to the sermon’s horrid sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely the mind of man is closely bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In some black spell; seeing that each one tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Himself from fireside joys, and Lydian airs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And converse high of those with glory crown’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still, still they toll, and I should feel a damp⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A chill as from a tomb, did I not know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they are dying like an outburnt lamp;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ’tis their sighing, wailing ere they go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into oblivion;⁠—that fresh flowers will grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many glories of immortal stamp.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-kosciusko" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Kosciusko</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Good Kosciusko, thy great name alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is a full harvest whence to reap high feeling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It comes upon us like the glorious pealing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the wide spheres⁠—an everlasting tone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now it tells me, that in worlds unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The names of heroes, burst from clouds concealing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are changed to harmonies, for ever stealing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through cloudless blue, and round each silver throne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It tells me too, that on a happy day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When some good spirit walks upon the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thy name with Alfred’s, and the great of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gently commingling, gives tremendous birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a loud hymn, that sounds far, far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To where the great God lives for evermore.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-the-grasshopper-and-cricket" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On the Grasshopper and Cricket</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The poetry of earth is never dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When all the birds are faint with the hot sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hide in cooling trees; a voice will run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From hedge to hedge about the new-mown mead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is the Grasshopper’s⁠—he takes the lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In summer luxury,⁠—he has never done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his delights; for when tired out with fun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rests at ease beneath some pleasant weed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poetry of earth is ceasing never:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On a lone winter evening, when the frost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Has wrought a silence, from the stove there shrills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cricket’s song, in warmth increasing ever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seems to one, in drowsiness half lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The Grasshopper’s among some grassy hills.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hymn-to-apollo" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Hymn to Apollo</h2>
			<p>
				<span>God of the golden bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the golden lyre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the golden hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the golden fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Charioteer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the patient year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where⁠—where slept thine ire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When like a blank idiot I put on thy wreath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thy laurel, thy glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The light of thy story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or was I a worm⁠—too low crawling, for death?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O Delphic Apollo!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Thunderer grasp’d and grasp’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Thunderer frown’d and frown’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eagle’s feathery mane</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For wrath became stiffen’d⁠—the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of breeding thunder</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Went drowsily under,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Muttering to be unbound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O why didst thou pity, and for a worm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Why touch thy soft lute</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Till the thunder was mute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why was not I crush’d⁠—such a pitiful germ?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O Delphic Apollo!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Pleiades were up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Watching the silent air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seeds and roots in the Earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were swelling for summer fare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The Ocean, its neighbour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was at its old labour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, who⁠—who did dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tie, like a madman, thy plant round his brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And grin and look proudly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And blaspheme so loudly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And live for that honour, to stoop to thee now?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O Delphic Apollo?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sleep-and-poetry" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Sleep and Poetry</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p xml:lang="enm">
						<span>As I lay in my bed slepe full unmete</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was unto me, but why that I ne might</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rest I ne wist, for there n’ as erthly wight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(As I suppose) had more of hertis ese</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than I, for I n’ ad sicknesse nor disese.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Chaucer</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>What is more gentle than a wind in summer?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is more soothing than the pretty hummer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That stays one moment in an open flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And buzzes cheerily from bower to bower?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is more tranquil than a musk-rose blowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a green island, far from all men’s knowing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More healthful than the leafiness of dales?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More secret than a nest of nightingales?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More serene than Cordelia’s countenance?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More full of visions than a high romance?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What, but thee, Sleep? Soft closer of our eyes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low murmurer of tender lullabies!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light hoverer around our happy pillows!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wreather of poppy buds, and weeping willows!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent entangler of a beauty’s tresses!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most happy listener! when the morning blesses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee for enlivening all the cheerful eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That glance so brightly at the new sunrise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But what is higher beyond thought than thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresher than berries of a mountain-tree?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More strange, more beautiful, more smooth, more regal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than wings of swans, than doves, than dim-seen eagle?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is it? And to what shall I compare it?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It has a glory, and nought else can share it:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thought thereof is awful, sweet, and holy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chasing away all worldliness and folly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming sometimes like fearful claps of thunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the low rumblings earth’s regions under;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sometimes like a gentle whispering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the secrets of some wond’rous thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That breathes about us in the vacant air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that we look around with prying stare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps to see shapes of light, aerial limning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And catch soft floatings from a faint-heard hymning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see the laurel wreath, on high suspended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is to crown our name when life is ended.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes it gives a glory to the voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the heart up-springs, rejoice! rejoice!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounds which will reach the Framer of all things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And die away in ardent mutterings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">No one who once the glorious sun has seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the clouds, and felt his bosom clean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his great Maker’s presence, but must know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What ’tis I mean, and feel his being glow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore no insult will I give his spirit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By telling what he sees from native merit.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">O Poesy! for thee I hold my pen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That am not yet a glorious denizen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy wide heaven⁠—should I rather kneel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon some mountain-top until I feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A growing splendour round about me hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And echo back the voice of thine own tongue?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Poesy! for thee I grasp my pen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That am not yet a glorious denizen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy wide heaven; yet, to my ardent prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield from thy sanctuary some clear air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoothed for intoxication by the breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of flowering bays, that I may die a death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of luxury, and my young spirit follow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The morning sunbeams to the great Apollo</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a fresh sacrifice; or, if I can bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The o’erwhelming sweets, ’twill bring to me the fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Visions of all places: a bowery nook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be elysium⁠—an eternal book</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence I may copy many a lovely saying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the leaves, and flowers⁠—about the playing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of nymphs in woods, and fountains; and the shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keeping a silence round a sleeping maid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a verse from so strange influence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we must ever wonder how, and whence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It came. Also imaginings will hover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round my fire-side, and haply there discover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vistas of solemn beauty, where I’d wander</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In happy silence, like the clear Meander</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through its lone vales; and where I found a spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of awfuller shade, or an enchanted grot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a green hill o’erspread with chequer’d dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of flowers, and fearful from its loveliness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Write on my tablets all that was permitted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that was for our human senses fitted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the events of this wide world I’d seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a strong giant, and my spirit tease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till at its shoulders it should proudly see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wings to find out an immortality.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Stop and consider! life is but a day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fragile dewdrop on its perilous way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a tree’s summit; a poor Indian’s sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his boat hastens to the monstrous steep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Montmorenci. Why so sad a moan?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life is the rose’s hope while yet unblown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The reading of an ever-changing tale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light uplifting of a maiden’s veil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pigeon tumbling in clear summer air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A laughing school-boy, without grief or care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Riding the springy branches of an elm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">O for ten years, that I may overwhelm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself in poesy; so I may do the deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That my own soul has to itself decreed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then I will pass the countries that I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In long perspective, and continually</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taste their pure fountains. First the realm I’ll pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Flora, and old Pan: sleep in the grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feed upon apples red, and strawberries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And choose each pleasure that my fancy sees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Catch the white-handed nymphs in shady places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To woo sweet kisses from averted faces,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play with their fingers, touch their shoulders white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a pretty shrinking with a bite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As hard as lips can make it: till agreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lovely tale of human life we’ll read.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one will teach a tame dove how it best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May fan the cool air gently o’er my rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another, bending o’er her nimble tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will set a green robe floating round her head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still will dance with ever-varied ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiling upon the flowers and the trees:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another will entice me on, and on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through almond blossoms and rich cinnamon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till in the bosom of a leafy world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We rest in silence, like two gems upcurl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the recesses of a pearly shell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And can I ever bid these joys farewell?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, I must pass them for a nobler life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where I may find the agonies, the strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of human hearts: for lo! I see afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ersailing the blue cragginess, a car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And steeds with streamy manes⁠—the charioteer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks out upon the winds with glorious fear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the numerous tramplings quiver lightly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along a huge cloud’s ridge; and now with sprightly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheel downward come they into fresher skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tipt round with silver from the sun’s bright eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still downward with capacious whirl they glide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I see them on a green-hill’s side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In breezy rest among the nodding stalks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charioteer with wond’rous gesture talks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the trees and mountains; and there soon appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shapes of delight, of mystery, and fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passing along before a dusky space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made by some mighty oaks: as they would chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some ever-fleeting music, on they sweep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! how they murmur, laugh, and smile, and weep:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some with upholden hand and mouth severe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some with their faces muffled to the ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between their arms; some, clear in youthful bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go glad and smilingly athwart the gloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some looking back, and some with upward gaze;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, thousands in a thousand different ways</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flit onward⁠—now a lovely wreath of girls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dancing their sleek hair into tangled curls;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now broad wings. Most awfully intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The driver of those steeds is forward bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seems to listen: O that I might know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that he writes with such a hurrying glow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The visions all are fled⁠—the car is fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the light of heaven, and in their stead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sense of real things comes doubly strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like a muddy stream, would bear along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul to nothingness: but I will strive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against all doubtings, and will keep alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thought of that same chariot, and the strange</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Journey it went.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Is there so small a range</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the present strength of manhood, that the high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imagination cannot freely fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she was wont of old? prepare her steeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paw up against the light, and do strange deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the clouds? Has she not shown us all?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the clear space of ether, to the small</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breath of new buds unfolding? From the meaning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Jove’s large eyebrow, to the tender greening</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of April meadows? here her altar shone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en in this isle; and who could paragon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fervid choir that lifted up a noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of harmony, to where it aye will poise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its mighty self of convoluting sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huge as a planet, and like that roll round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eternally around a dizzy void?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ay, in those days the Muses were nigh cloy’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With honours; nor had any other care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than to sing out and soothe their wavy hair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Could all this be forgotten? Yes, a schism</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nurtured by foppery and barbarism,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made great Apollo blush for this his land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men were thought wise who could not understand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His glories: with a puling infant’s force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sway’d about upon a rocking-horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thought it Pegasus. Ah, dismal-soul’d!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winds of heaven blew, the ocean roll’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its gathering waves⁠—ye felt it not. The blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bared its eternal bosom, and the dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of summer nights collected still to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The morning precious: beauty was awake!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why were ye not awake? But ye were dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To things ye knew not of,⁠—were closely wed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To musty laws lined out with wretched rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And compass vile: so that ye taught a school</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of dolts to smooth, inlay, and clip, and fit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, like the certain wands of Jacob’s wit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their verses tallied. Easy was the task:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand handicraftsmen wore the mask</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Poesy. Ill-fated, impious race!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That blasphem’d the bright Lyrist to his face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And did not know it,⁠—no, they went about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding a poor, decrepid standard out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mark’d with most flimsy mottoes, and in large</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The name of one Boileau!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">O ye whose charge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is to hover round our pleasant hills!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose congregated majesty so fills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My boundly reverence, that I cannot trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your hallowed names, in this unholy place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So near those common folk; did not their shames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Affright you? Did our old lamenting Thames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delight you? did ye never cluster round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delicious Avon, with a mournful sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weep? Or did ye wholly bid adieu</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To regions where no more the laurel grew?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or did ye stay to give a welcoming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To some lone spirits who could proudly sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their youth away, and die? ’Twas even so:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let me think away those times of woe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now ’tis a fairer season; ye have breathed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich benedictions o’er us; ye have wreathed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh garlands: for sweet music has been heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In many places;⁠—some has been upstirr’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out its crystal dwelling in a lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a swan’s ebon bill; from a thick brake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nested and quiet in a valley mild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bubbles a pipe; fine sounds are floating wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the earth: happy are ye and glad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These things are, doubtless; yet in truth we’ve had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange thunders from the potency of song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingled indeed with what is sweet and strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From majesty: but in clear truth the themes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are ugly clubs, the Poets Polyphemes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disturbing the grand sea. A drainless shower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of light is Poesy; ’tis the supreme of power;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis might half slumb’ring on its own right arm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The very archings of her eyelids charm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand willing agents to obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And still she governs with the mildest sway:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But strength alone though of the Muses born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is like a fallen angel: trees uptorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkness, and worms, and shrouds, and sepulchres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delight it; for it feeds upon the burrs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thorns of life; forgetting the great end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Poesy, that it should be a friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To soothe the cares, and lift the thoughts of man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Yet I rejoice: a myrtle fairer than</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’er grow in Paphos, from the bitter weeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifts its sweet head into the air, and feeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A silent space with ever sprouting green.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All tenderest birds there find a pleasant screen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creep through the shade with jaunty fluttering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nibble the little cupped flowers and sing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let us clear away the choking thorns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From round its gentle stem; let the young fawns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yeanèd in after-times, when we are flown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find a fresh sward beneath it, overgrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With simple flowers: let there nothing be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More boisterous than a lover’s bended knee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nought more ungentle than the placid look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one who leans upon a closèd book;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nought more untranquil than the grassy slopes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between two hills. All hail, delightful hopes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she was wont, th’ imagination</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into most lovely labyrinths will be gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they shall be accounted poet kings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who simply tell the most heart-easing things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O may these joys be ripe before I die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Will not some say that I presumptuously</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have spoken? that from hastening disgrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twere better far to hide my foolish face?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That whining boyhood should with reverence bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the dread thunderbolt could reach? How!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I do hide myself, it sure shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the very fane, the light of Poesy:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I do fall, at least I will be laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the silence of a poplar shade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over me the grass shall be smooth shaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there shall be a kind memorial graven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But off, Despondence! miserable bane!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They should not know thee, who athirst to gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A noble end, are thirsty every hour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What though I am not wealthy in the dower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of spanning wisdom; though I do not know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shiftings of the mighty winds that blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither and thither all the changing thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of man: though no great minist’ring reason sorts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out the dark mysteries of human souls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To clear conceiving: yet there ever rolls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vast idea before me, and I glean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefrom my liberty; thence too I’ve seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The end and aim of Poesy. ’Tis clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As anything most true; as that the year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is made of the four seasons⁠—manifest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a large cross, some old cathedral’s crest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifted to the white clouds. Therefore should I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be but the essence of deformity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A coward, did my very eyelids wink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At speaking out what I have dared to think.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! rather let me like a madman run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over some precipice; let the hot sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melt my Dædalian wings, and drive me down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Convuls’d and headlong! Stay! an inward frown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of conscience bids me be more calm awhile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ocean dim, sprinkled with many an isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spreads awfully before me. How much toil!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many days! what desperate turmoil!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere I can have explored its widenesses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, what a task! upon my bended knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could unsay those⁠—no, impossible!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impossible!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">For sweet relief I’ll dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On humbler thoughts, and let this strange assay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Begun in gentleness die so away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en now all tumult from my bosom fades:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I turn full-hearted to the friendly aids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That smooth the path of honour; brotherhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And friendliness the nurse of mutual good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hearty grasp that sends a pleasant sonnet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the brain ere one can think upon it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silence when some rhymes are coming out;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when they’re come, the very pleasant rout:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The message certain to be done to-morrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis perhaps as well that it should be to borrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some precious book from out its snug retreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cluster round it when we next shall meet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce can I scribble on; for lovely airs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are fluttering round the room like doves in pairs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many delights of that glad day recalling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first my senses caught their tender falling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with these airs come forms of elegance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stooping their shoulders o’er a horse’s prance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Careless, and grand⁠—fingers soft and round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parting luxuriant curls;⁠—and the swift bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Bacchus from his chariot, when his eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made Ariadne’s cheek look blushingly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus I remember all the pleasant flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of words at opening a portfolio.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Things such as these are ever harbingers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To trains of peaceful images: the stirs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a swan’s neck unseen among the rushes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A linnet starting all about the bushes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A butterfly, with golden wings broad parted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nestling a rose, convuls’d as though it smarted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With over pleasure⁠—many, many more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might I indulge at large in all my store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of luxuries: yet I must not forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleep, quiet with his poppy coronet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what there may be worthy in these rhymes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I partly owe to him: and thus, the chimes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of friendly voices had just given place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To as sweet a silence, when I ’gan retrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pleasant day, upon a couch at ease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was a poet’s house who keeps the keys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pleasure’s temple. Round about were hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glorious features of the bards who sung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In other ages⁠—cold and sacred busts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiled at each other. Happy he who trusts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To clear Futurity his darling fame!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then there were fauns and satyrs taking aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At swelling apples with a frisky leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reaching fingers, ’mid a luscious heap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of vine leaves. Then there rose to view a fane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of liny marble, and thereto a train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of nymphs approaching fairly o’er the sward:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One, loveliest, holding her white hand toward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dazzling sunrise: two sisters sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bending their graceful figures till they meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the trippings of a little child:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some are hearing, eagerly, the wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrilling liquidity of dewy piping.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See, in another picture, nymphs are wiping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cherishingly Diana’s timorous limbs;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fold of lawny mantle dabbling swims</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the bath’s edge, and keeps a gentle motion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the subsiding crystal: as when ocean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaves calmly its broad swelling smoothiness o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its rocky marge, and balances once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The patient weeds; that now unshent by foam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feel all about their undulating home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Sappho’s meek head was there half smiling down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At nothing; just as though the earnest frown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of over-thinking had that moment gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From off her brow, and left her all alone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Great Alfred’s too, with anxious, pitying eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if he always listened to the sighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the goaded world; and Kosciusko’s, worn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By horrid suffrance⁠—mightily forlorn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Petrarch, outstepping from the shady green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Starts at the sight of Laura; nor can wean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes from her sweet face. Most happy they!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For over them was seen a free display</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of outspread wings, and from between them shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The face of Poesy: from off her throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She overlook’d things that I scarce could tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The very sense of where I was might well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep Sleep aloof: but more than that there came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought after thought to nourish up the flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my breast; so that the morning light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surprised me even from a sleepless night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And up I rose refresh’d, and glad, and gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resolving to begin that very day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These lines; and howsoever they be done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I leave them as a father does his son.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="i-stood-tiptoe-upon-a-little-hill" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">“I Stood Tiptoe Upon a Little Hill”</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“Places of nestling green, for poets made.”</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Leigh Hunt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Story of Rimini</i></cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I stood tiptoe upon a little hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The air was cooling, and so very still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the sweet buds which with a modest pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pull droopingly, in slanting curve aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their scantly-leaved and finely tapering stems,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not yet lost those starry diadems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught from the early sobbing of the morn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clouds were pure and white as flocks new shorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fresh from the clear brook; sweetly they slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the blue fields of heaven, and then there crept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little noiseless noise among the leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born of the very sigh that silence heaves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For not the faintest motion could be seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the shades that slanted o’er the green.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was wide wand’ring for the greediest eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To peer about upon variety;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far round the horizon’s crystal air to skim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trace the dwindled edgings of its brim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To picture out the quaint and curious bending</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a fresh woodland alley, never-ending;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or by the bowery clefts, and leafy shelves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guess where the jaunty streams refresh themselves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I gazed awhile, and felt as light and free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though the fanning wings of Mercury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had played upon my heels: I was light-hearted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many pleasures to my vision started;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So I straightway began to pluck a posey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of luxuries bright, milky, soft, and rosy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">A bush of May flowers with the bees about them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, sure no tasteful nook could be without them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let a lush laburnum oversweep them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let long grass grow round the roots to keep them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moist, cool, and green; and shade the violets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they may bind the moss in leafy nets.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">A filbert hedge with wild briar overtwined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clumps of woodbine taking the soft wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon their summer thrones; there too should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The frequent chequer of a youngling tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with a score of light green brethren shoots</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the quaint mossiness of aged roots:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round which is heard a spring-head of clear waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Babbling so wildly of its lovely daughters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spreading blue-bells: it may haply mourn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That such fair clusters should be rudely torn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their fresh beds, and scattered thoughtlessly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By infant hands, left on the path to die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Open afresh your round of starry folds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye ardent marigolds!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dry up the moisture from your golden lids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For great Apollo bids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in these days your praises should be sung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On many harps, which he has lately strung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when again your dewiness he kisses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell him, I have you in my world of blisses:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So haply when I rove in some far vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mighty voice may come upon the gale.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Here are sweet peas, on tiptoe for a flight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wings of gentle flush o’er delicate white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taper fingers catching at all things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bind them all about with tiny rings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Linger awhile upon some bending planks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lean against a streamlet’s rushy banks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watch intently Nature’s gentle doings:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will be found softer than ring-dove’s cooings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How silent comes the water round that bend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the minutest whisper does it send</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the o’erhanging sallows: blades of grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly across the chequer’d shadows pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why, you might read two sonnets, ere they reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the hurrying freshnesses aye preach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A natural sermon o’er their pebbly beds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where swarms of minnows show their little heads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Staying their wavy bodies ’gainst the streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To taste the luxury of sunny beams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Temper’d with coolness. How they ever wrestle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their own sweet delight, and ever nestle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their silver bellies on the pebbly sand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you but scantily hold out the hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That very instant not one will remain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But turn your eye, and they are there again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ripples seem right glad to reach those cresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cool themselves among the em’rald tresses;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The while they cool themselves, they freshness give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moisture, that the bowery green may live:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So keeping up an interchange of favours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like good men in the truth of their behaviours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes goldfinches one by one will drop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From low-hung branches; little space they stop;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sip, and twitter, and their feathers sleek;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then off at once, as in a wanton freak:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or perhaps, to show their black and golden wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pausing upon their yellow flutterings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were I in such a place, I sure should pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That nought less sweet might call my thoughts away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the soft rustle of a maiden’s gown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fanning away the dandelion’s down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the light music of her nimble toes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Patting against the sorrel as she goes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How she would start, and blush, thus to be caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playing in all her innocence of thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O let me lead her gently o’er the brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watch her half-smiling lips, and downward look;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O let me for one moment touch her wrist;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me one moment to her breathing list;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as she leaves me, may she often turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her fair eyes looking through her locks auburne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What next? A tuft of evening primroses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er which the mind may hover till it dozes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er which it well might take a pleasant sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that ’tis ever startled by the leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of buds into ripe flowers; or by the flitting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of diverse moths, that aye their rest are quitting;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or by the moon lifting her silver rim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above a cloud, and with a gradual swim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming into the blue with all her light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Maker of sweet poets, dear delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this fair world, and all its gentle livers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spangler of clouds, halo of crystal rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingler with leaves, and dew and tumbling streams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closer of lovely eyes to lovely dreams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lover of loneliness, and wandering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of upcast eye, and tender pondering!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee must I praise above all other glories</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That smile us on to tell delightful stories.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what has made the sage or poet write</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the fair paradise of Nature’s light?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the calm grandeur of a sober line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We see the waving of the mountain pine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when a tale is beautifully staid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We feel the safety of a hawthorn glade:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When it is moving on luxurious wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul is lost in pleasant smotherings:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair dewy roses brush against our faces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flowering laurels spring from diamond vases;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erhead we see the jasmine and sweet-briar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bloomy grapes laughing from green attire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While at our feet, the voice of crystal bubbles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charms us at once away from all our troubles:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that we feel uplifted from the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walking upon the white clouds wreath’d and curl’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So felt he, who first told, how Psyche went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the smooth wind to realms of wonderment;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What Psyche felt, and Love, when their full lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First touch’d; what amorous and fondling nips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gave each other’s cheeks; with all their sighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how they kist each other’s tremulous eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver lamp,⁠—the ravishment,⁠—the wonder,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The darkness,⁠—loneliness,⁠—the fearful thunder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their woes gone by, and both to heaven upflown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bow for gratitude before Jove’s throne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So did he feel, who pull’d the boughs aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we might look into a forest wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To catch a glimpse of Fauns, and Dryades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming with softest rustle through the trees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And garlands woven of flowers wild, and sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upheld on ivory wrists, or sporting feet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telling us how fair, trembling Syrinx fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arcadian Pan, with such a fearful dread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor Nymph,⁠—poor Pan,⁠—how he did weep to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nought but a lovely sighing of the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the reedy stream; a half-heard strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of sweet desolation⁠—balmy pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">What first inspired a bard of old to sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Narcissus pining o’er the untainted spring?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In some delicious ramble, he had found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little space, with boughs all woven round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the midst of all, a clearer pool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than e’er reflected in its pleasant cool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue sky here, and there, serenely peeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through tendril wreaths fantastically creeping.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the bank a lonely flower he spied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A meek and forlorn flower, with naught of pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drooping its beauty o’er the watery clearness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To woo its own sad image into nearness:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deaf to light Zephyrus it would not move;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still would seem to droop, to pine, to love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So while the Poet stood in this sweet spot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some fainter gleamings o’er his fancy shot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor was it long ere he had told the tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of young Narcissus, and sad Echo’s bale.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Where had he been, from whose warm head out-flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sweetest of all songs, that ever new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That aye refreshing, pure deliciousness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming ever to bless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wanderer by moonlight? to him bringing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shapes from the invisible world, unearthly singing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out the middle air, from flowery nests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the pillowy silkiness that rests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full in the speculation of the stars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! surely he had burst our mortal bars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into some wond’rous region he had gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To search for thee, divine Endymion!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">He was a Poet, sure a lover too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stood on Latmus’ top, what time there blew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft breezes from the myrtle vale below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brought in faintness solemn, sweet, and slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hymn from Dian’s temple; while upswelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The incense went to her own starry dwelling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But though her face was clear as infant’s eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though she stood smiling o’er the sacrifice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Poet wept at her so piteous fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept that such beauty should be desolate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in fine wrath some golden sounds he won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave meek Cynthia her Endymion.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Queen of the wide air; thou most lovely queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the brightness that mine eyes have seen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou exceedest all things in thy shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So every tale, does this sweet tale of thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O for three words of honey, that I might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell but one wonder of thy bridal night!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Where distant ships do seem to show their keels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phœbus awhile delay’d his mighty wheels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn’d to smile upon thy bashful eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere he his unseen pomp would solemnize.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The evening weather was so bright, and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That men of health were of unusual cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stepping like Homer at the trumpet’s call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or young Apollo on the pedestal:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lovely women were as fair and warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Venus looking sideways in alarm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The breezes were ethereal, and pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crept through half closed lattices to cure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The languid sick; it cool’d their fever’d sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soothed them into slumbers full and deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon they awoke clear-eyed: nor burnt with thirsting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor with hot fingers, nor with temples bursting:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And springing up, they met the wond’ring sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their dear friends, nigh foolish with delight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who feel their arms, and breasts, and kiss and stare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on their placid foreheads part the hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young men and maidens at each other gaz’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hands held back, and motionless, amaz’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see the brightness in each other’s eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so they stood, fill’d with a sweet surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until their tongues were loos’d in poesy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore no lover did of anguish die:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the soft numbers, in that moment spoken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made silken ties, that never may be broken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cynthia! I cannot tell the greater blisses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That follow’d thine, and thy dear shepherd’s kisses:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was there a Poet born?⁠—But now no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My wand’ring spirit must no further soar.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-7" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Sonnet</span>
				<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">After Dark Vapours</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>After dark vapours have oppress’d our plains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For a long dreary season, comes a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Born of the gentle South, and clears away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the sick heavens all unseemly stains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The anxious month, relieved its pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Takes as a long-lost right the feel of May;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The eyelids with the passing coolness play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like rose leaves with the drip of summer rains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And calmest thoughts come round us; as, of leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Budding,⁠—fruit ripening in stillness,⁠—Autumn suns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiling at eve upon the quiet sheaves,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet Sappho’s cheek,⁠—a sleeping infant’s breath,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gradual sand that through an hour-glass runs,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A woodland rivulet,⁠—a Poet’s death.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="written-on-the-blank-space-at-the-end-of-chaucers-tale-of-the-floure-and-the-lefe" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Written on the Blank Space at the End of Chaucer’s Tale of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Floure and the Lefe</i></h2>
			<p>
				<span>This pleasant tale is like a little copse:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The honied lines so freshly interlace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To keep the reader in so sweet a place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that he here and there full-hearted stops;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oftentimes he feels the dewy drops</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come cool and suddenly against his face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, by the wandering melody, may trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which way the tender-legged linnet hops.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh! what a power has white simplicity!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What mighty power has this gentle story!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I, that do ever feel athirst for glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could at this moment be content to lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meekly upon the grass, as those whose sobbings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were heard of none beside the mournful robins.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-haydon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Haydon</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Haydon! forgive me that I cannot speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Definitively of these mighty things;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forgive me, that I have not Eagle’s wings⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That what I want I know not where to seek:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And think that I would not be over meek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In rolling out upfollow’d thunderings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even to the steep of Heliconian springs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were I of ample strength for such a freak⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think too, that all those numbers should be thine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose else? In this who touch thy vesture’s hem?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when men star’d at what was most divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With browless idiotism⁠—o’erwise phlegm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hadst beheld the Hesperean shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of their star in the East, and gone to worship them.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-seeing-the-elgin-marbles" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Seeing the Elgin Marbles</h2>
			<p>
				<span>My spirit is too weak⁠—mortality</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weighs heavily on me like unwilling sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And each imagin’d pinnacle and steep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of godlike hardship tells me I must die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a sick Eagle looking at the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet ’tis a gentle luxury to weep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I have not the cloudy winds to keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh for the opening of the morning’s eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such dim-conceivèd glories of the brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bring round the heart an indescribable feud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So do these wonders a most dizzy pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That mingles Grecian grandeur with the rude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wasting of old Time⁠—with a billowy main⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A sun⁠—a shadow of a magnitude.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-leigh-hunts-poem-the-story-of-rimini" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Leigh Hunt’s Poem, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Story of Rimini</i></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Who loves to peer up at the morning sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With half-shut eyes and comfortable cheek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let him, with this sweet tale, full often seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For meadows where the little rivers run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who loves to linger with that brightest one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Heaven⁠—Hesperus⁠—let him lowly speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These numbers to the night, and starlight meek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or moon, if that her hunting be begun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who knows these delights, and too is prone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To moralize upon a smile or tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will find at once a region of his own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A bower for his spirit, and will steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To alleys, where the fir-tree drops its cone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where robins hop, and fallen leaves are sear.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-leigh-hunt-esq" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>To Leigh Hunt, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">A Dedication</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Glory and loveliness have pass’d away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For if we wander ont in early morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No wreathèd incense do we see upborne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the east, to meet the smiling day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No crowd of nymphs soft-voic’d and young, and gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In woven baskets bringing ears of corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roses, and pinks, and violets, to adorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shrine of Flora in her early May.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But there are left delights as high as these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I shall ever bless my destiny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in a time, when under pleasant trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pan is no longer sought, I feel a free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A leafy luxury, seeing I could please</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With these poor offerings, a man like thee.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-the-sea" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On the Sea</h2>
			<p>
				<span>It keeps eternal whisperings around</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Desolate shores, and with its mighty swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gluts twice ten thousand caverns, till the spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hecate leaves them their old shadowy sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often ’tis in such gentle temper found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That scarcely will the very smallest shell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be mov’d for days from where it sometime fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When last the winds of Heaven were unbound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O ye! who have your eyeballs vex’d and tir’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feast them upon the wideness of the Sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O ye! whose ears are dinn’d with uproar rude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or fed too much with cloying melody,—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Sit ye near some old cavern’s mouth, and brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until ye start, as if the sea-nymphs quired!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="endymion" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Endymion</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>“The stretched metre of an antique song.”</p>
					<cite>Shakspeare’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sonnets</i></cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="endymion-dedication" epub:type="dedication">
				<p>
					<span>Inscribed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with every feeling of pride and regret</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and with “a bowed mind”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to the memory of</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the most English of poets except Shakspeare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thomas Chatterton</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="endymion-preface" epub:type="preface z3998:non-fiction">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Preface</h3>
				<p>Knowing within myself the manner in which this Poem has been produced, it is not without a feeling of regret that I make it public.</p>
				<p>What manner I mean, will be quite clear to the reader, who must soon perceive great inexperience, immaturity, and every error denoting a feverish attempt, rather than a deed accomplished. The two first books, and indeed the two last, I feel sensible are not of such completion as to warrant their passing the press; nor should they if I thought a year’s castigation would do them any good;⁠—it will not: the foundations are too sandy. It is just that this youngster should die away: a sad thought for me, if I had not some hope that while it is dwindling I may be plotting, and fitting myself for verses fit to live.</p>
				<p>This may be speaking too presumptuously, and may deserve a punishment: but no feeling man will be forward to inflict it: he will leave me alone, with the conviction that there is not a fiercer hell than the failure in a great object. This is not written with the least atom of purpose to forestall criticisms of course, but from the desire I have to conciliate men who are competent to look, and who do look with a zealous eye, to the honour of English literature.</p>
				<p>The imagination of a boy is healthy, and the mature imagination of a man is healthy; but there is a space of life between, in which the soul is in a ferment, the character undecided, the way of life uncertain, the ambition thick-sighted: thence proceeds mawkishness, and all the thousand bitters which those men I speak of must necessarily taste in going over the following pages.</p>
				<p>I hope I have not in too late a day touched the beautiful mythology of Greece, and dulled its brightness: for I wish to try once more, before I bid it farewell.</p>
				<footer>
					<p class="signature">Teignmouth, <time datetime="1818-04-10">April 10, 1818</time>.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
			<section id="endymion-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">A thing of beauty is a joy for ever:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its loveliness increases; it will never</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass into nothingness; but still will keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bower quiet for us, and a sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of sweet dreams, and health, and quiet breathing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore, on every morrow, are we wreathing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A flowery band to bind us to the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spite of despondence, of the inhuman dearth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of noble natures, of the gloomy days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the unhealthy and o’er-darken’d ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made for our searching: yes, in spite of all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some shape of beauty moves away the pall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From our dark spirits. Such the sun, the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trees old and young, sprouting a shady boon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For simple sheep; and such are daffodils</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the green world they live in; and clear rills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for themselves a cooling covert make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst the hot season; the mid-forest brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich with a sprinkling of fair musk-rose blooms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such too is the grandeur of the dooms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We have imagined for the mighty dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All lovely tales that we have heard or read:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An endless fountain of immortal drink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pouring unto us from the heaven’s brink.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Nor do we merely feel these essences</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one short hour; no, even as the trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That whisper round a temple become soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear as the temple’s self, so does the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The passion poesy, glories infinite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haunt us till they become a cheering light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto our souls, and bound to us so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, whether there be shine, or gloom o’ercast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They alway must be with us, or we die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Therefore ’tis with full happiness that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will trace the story of Endymion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very music of the name has gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into my being, and each pleasant scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is growing fresh before me as the green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of our own valleys: so I will begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now while I cannot hear the city’s din;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now while the early budders are just new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And run in mazes of the youngest hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About old forests; while the willow trails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its delicate amber; and the dairy pails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bring home increase of milk. And, as the year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grows lush in juicy stalks, I’ll smoothly steer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My little boat, for many quiet hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With streams that deepen freshly into bowers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many and many a verse I hope to write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the daisies, vermeil rimm’d and white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hide in deep herbage; and ere yet the bees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hum about globes of clover and sweet peas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must be near the middle of my story.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O may no wintry season, bare, and hoary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See it half-finish’d: but let Autumn bold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With universal tinge of sober gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be all about me when I make an end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now at once, adventuresome, I send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My herald thought into a wilderness:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There let its trumpet blow, and quickly dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My uncertain path with green, that I may speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Easily onward, thorough flowers and weed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Upon the sides of Latmos was outspread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mighty forest: for the moist earth fed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So plenteously all weed-hidden roots</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into o’erhanging boughs, and precious fruits.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it had gloomy shades, sequestered deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where no man went; and if from shepherd’s keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lamb stray’d far a-down those inmost glens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never again saw he the happy pens</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither his brethren, bleating with content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the hills at every nightfall went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the shepherds, ’twas believed ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That not one fleecy lamb which thus did sever</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the white flock, but pass’d unworrièd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By angry wolf, or pard with prying head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until it came to some unfooted plains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where fed the herds of Pan: aye great his gains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who thus one lamb did lose. Paths there were many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Winding through palmy fern, and rushes fenny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ivy banks; all leading pleasantly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a wide lawn, whence one could only see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stems thronging all around between the swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of turf and slanting branches: who could tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The freshness of the space of heaven above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Edged round with dark tree-tops? through which a dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would often beat its wings, and often too</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little cloud would move across the blue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Full in the middle of this pleasantness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There stood a marble altar, with a tress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flowers budded newly; and the dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had taken fairy phantasies to strew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daisies upon the sacred sward last eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so the dawned light in pomp receive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ’twas the morn: Apollo’s upward fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made every eastern cloud a silvery pyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of brightness so unsullied, that therein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A melancholy spirit well might win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oblivion, and melt out his essence fine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the winds: rain-scented eglantine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave temperate sweets to that well-wooing sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lark was lost in him; cold springs had run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To warm their chilliest bubbles in the grass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man’s voice was on the mountains; and the mass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of nature’s lives and wonders pulsed tenfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feel this sun-rise and its glories old.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Now while the silent workings of the dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were busiest, into that self-same lawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All suddenly, with joyful cries, there sped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A troop of little children garlanded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who gathering round the altar seem’d to pry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earnestly round as wishing to espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some folk of holiday: nor had they waited</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For many moments, ere their ears were sated</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a faint breath of music, which ev’n then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill’d out its voice, and died away again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within a little space again it gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its airy swellings, with a gentle wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To light-hung leaves, in smoothest echoes breaking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through copse-clad valleys,⁠—ere their death, o’er-taking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The surgy murmurs of the lonely sea.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And now, as deep into the wood as we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might mark a lynx’s eye, there glimmer’d light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair faces and a rush of garments white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plainer and plainer showing, till at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the widest alley they all past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making directly for the woodland altar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O kindly muse! let not my weak tongue faulter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In telling of this goodly company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their old piety, and of their glee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let a portion of ethereal dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall on my head, and presently unmew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul; that I may dare, in wayfaring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stammer where old Chaucer used to sing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Leading the way, young damsels danced along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing the burden of a shepherd song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each having a white wicker, overbrimm’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With April’s tender younglings: next, well trimm’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A crowd of shepherds with as sunburnt looks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As may be read of in Arcadian books;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as sat listening round Apollo’s pipe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the great deity, for earth too ripe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let his divinity o’erflowing die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In music, through the vales of Thessaly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some idly trail’d their sheep-hooks on the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some kept up a shrilly mellow sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ebon-tipped flutes: close after these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now coming from beneath the forest trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A venerable priest full soberly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begirt with minist’ring looks: alway his eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steadfast upon the matted turf he kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after him his sacred vestments swept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his right hand there swung a vase, milk-white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mingled wine, out-sparkling generous light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his left he held a basket full</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all sweet herbs that searching eye could cull:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wild thyme, and valley-lilies whiter still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Leda’s love, and cresses from the rill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His aged head, crowned with beechen wreath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem’d like a poll of ivy in the teeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of winter hoar. Then came another crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of shepherds, lifting in due time aloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their share of the ditty. After them appear’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up-follow’d by a multitude that rear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their voices to the clouds, a fair-wrought car,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Easily rolling so as scarce to mar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The freedom of three steeds of dapple brown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who stood therein did seem of great renown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the throng. His youth was fully blown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showing like Ganymede to manhood grown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for those simple times, his garments were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A chieftain king’s; beneath his breast, half bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was hung a silver bugle, and between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His nervy knees there lay a boar-spear keen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A smile was on his countenance; he seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To common lookers-on, like one who dream’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of idleness in groves Elysian:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there were some who feelingly could scan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lurking trouble in his nether lip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And see that oftentimes the reins would slip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through his forgotten hands: then would they sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And think of yellow leaves, of owlets’ cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of logs piled solemnly.⁠—Ah, well-a-day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should our young Endymion pine away!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Soon the assembly, in a circle ranged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood silent round the shrine: each look was changed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sudden veneration: women meek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beckon’d their sons to silence; while each cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of virgin bloom paled gently for slight fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion too, without a forest peer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood, wan, and pale, and with an awed face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among his brothers of the mountain chase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In midst of all, the venerable priest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eyed them with joy from greatest to the least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after lifting up his aged hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus spake he: “Men of Latmos! shepherd bands!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose care it is to guard a thousand flocks:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether descended from beneath the rocks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That overtop your mountains; whether come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From valleys where the pipe is never dumb;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or from your swelling downs, where sweet air stirs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blue harebells lightly, and where prickly furze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Buds lavish gold; or ye, whose precious charge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nibble their fill at ocean’s very marge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose mellow reeds are touch’d with sounds forlorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the dim echoes of old Triton’s horn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mothers and wives! who day by day prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scrip, with needments, for the mountain air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all ye gentle girls who foster up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Udderless lambs, and in a little cup</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will put choice honey for a favour’d youth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, every one attend! for in good truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our vows are wanting to our great god Pan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are not our lowing heifers sleeker than</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Night-swollen mushrooms? Are not our wide plains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speckled with countless fleeces? Have not rains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Green’d over April’s lap? No howling sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sickens our fearful ewes; and we have had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great bounty from Endymion our lord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth is glad: the merry lark has pour’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His early song against yon breezy sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That spreads so clear o’er our solemnity.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thus ending, on the shrine he heap’d a spire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of teeming sweets, enkindling sacred fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon he stain’d the thick and spongy sod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wine, in honour of the shepherd-god.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now while the earth was drinking it, and while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bay leaves were crackling in the fragrant pile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gummy frankincense was sparkling bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Neath smothering parsley, and a hazy light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spread grayly eastward, thus a chorus sang:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“O thou, whose mighty palace roof doth hang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From jagged trunks, and overshadoweth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternal whispers, glooms, the birth, life, death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of unseen flowers in heavy peacefulness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lov’st to see the hamadryads dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ruffled locks where meeting hazels darken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through whole solemn hours dost sit, and hearken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dreary melody of bedded reeds⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In desolate places, where dank moisture breeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pipy hemlock to strange overgrowth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bethinking thee, how melancholy loth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wast to lose fair Syrinx⁠—do thou now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thy love’s milky brow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all the trembling mazes that she ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear us, great Pan!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“O thou, for whose soul-soothing quiet, turtles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passion their voices cooingly ’mong myrtles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time thou wanderest at eventide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through sunny meadows, that outskirt the side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thine enmossed realms: O thou, to whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broad-leaved fig-trees even now foredoom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ripen’d fruitage; yellow-girted bees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their golden honeycombs; our village leas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their fairest blossom’d beans and poppied corn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chuckling linnet its five young unborn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sing for thee; low-creeping strawberries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their summer coolness; pent-up butterflies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their freckled wings; yea, the fresh budding year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All its completions⁠—be quickly near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By every wind that nods the mountain pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O forester divine!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Thou, to whom every faun and satyr flies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For willing service; whether to surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The squatted hare while in half-sleeping fit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or upward ragged precipices flit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To save poor lambkins from the eagle’s maw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or by mysterious enticement draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bewilder’d shepherds to their path again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to tread breathless round the frothy main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gather up all fancifullest shells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thee to tumble into Naiads’ cells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, being hidden, laugh at their out-peeping;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to delight thee with fantastic leaping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The while they pelt each other on the crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With silvery oak-apples, and fir-cones brown⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all the echoes that about thee ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear us, O satyr king!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“O Hearkener to the loud-clapping shears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While ever and anon to his shorn peers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A ram goes bleating: Winder of the horn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When snouted wild-boars routing tender corn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anger our huntsman: Breather round our farms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep off mildews, and all weather harms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange ministrant of undescribed sounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That come a-swooning over hollow grounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wither drearily on barren moors:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dread opener of the mysterious doors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leading to universal knowledge⁠—see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great son of Dryope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The many that are come to pay their vows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With leaves about their brows!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Be still the unimaginable lodge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For solitary thinkings; such as dodge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conception to the very bourne of heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then leave the naked brain: be still the leaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That spreading in this dull and clodded earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gives it a touch ethereal⁠—a new birth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be still a symbol of immensity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A firmament reflected in a sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An element filling the space between;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An unknown⁠—but no more: we humbly screen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With uplift hands our foreheads, lowly bending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And giving out a shout most heaven-rending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conjure thee to receive our humble Pæan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon thy Mount Lycean!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Even while they brought the burden to a close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shout from the whole multitude arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That linger’d in the air like dying rolls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of abrupt thunder, when Ionian shoals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dolphins bob their noses through the brine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime, on shady levels, mossy fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young companies nimbly began dancing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the swift treble pipe, and humming string.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, those fair living forms swam heavenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tunes forgotten⁠—out of memory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair creatures! whose young children’s children bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thermopylæ its heroes⁠—not yet dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in old marbles ever beautiful.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High genitors, unconscious did they cull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time’s sweet first-fruits⁠—they danced to weariness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then in quiet circles did they press</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hillock turf, and caught the latter end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some strange history, potent to send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A young mind from its bodily tenement.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or they might watch the quoit-pitchers, intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On either side; pitying the sad death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hyacinthus, when the cruel breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Zephyr slew him,⁠—Zephyr penitent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who now, ere Phœbus mounts the firmament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fondles the flower amid the sobbing rain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The archers too, upon a wider plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the feathery whizzing of the shaft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the dull twanging bowstring, and the raft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Branch down sweeping from a tall ash top</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call’d up a thousand thoughts to envelope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those who would watch. Perhaps, the trembling knee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And frantic gape of lonely Niobe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor, lonely Niobe! when her lovely young</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were dead and gone, and her caressing tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay a lost thing upon her paly lip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And very, very deadliness did nip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her motherly cheeks. Aroused from this sad mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By one, who at a distance loud halloo’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uplifting his strong bow into the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many might after brighter visions stare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the Argonauts, in blind amaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tossing about on Neptune’s restless ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until, from the horizon’s vaulted side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There shot a golden splendour far and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spangling those million poutings of the brine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With quivering ore: ’twas even an awful shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the exaltation of Apollo’s bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A heavenly beacon in their dreary woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who thus were ripe for high contemplating,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might turn their steps towards the sober ring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where sat Endymion and the aged priest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mong shepherds gone in eld, whose looks increased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silvery setting of their mortal star.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There they discoursed upon the fragile bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That keeps us from our homes ethereal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what our duties there: to nightly call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vesper, the beauty-crest of summer weather;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To summon all the downiest clouds together</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the sun’s purple couch; to emulate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In minist’ring the potent rule of fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With speed of fire-tail’d exhalations;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tint her pallid cheek with bloom, who cons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet poesy by moonlight: besides these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A world of other unguess’d offices.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon they wander’d, by divine converse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into Elysium; vying to rehearse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each one his own anticipated bliss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One felt heart-certain that he could not miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His quick-gone love, among fair blossom’d boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where every zephyr-sigh pouts, and endows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her lips with music for the welcoming.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another wish’d, ’mid that eternal spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet his rosy child, with feathery sails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweeping, eye-earnestly, through almond vales:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, suddenly, should stoop through the smooth wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the balmiest leaves his temples bind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, ever after, through those regions be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His messenger, his little Mercury.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some were athirst in soul to see again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their fellow-huntsmen o’er the wide champaign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In times long past; to sit with them, and talk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the chances in their earthly walk;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comparing, joyfully, their plenteous stores</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happiness, to when upon the moors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Benighted, close they huddled from the cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shared their famish’d scrips. Thus all out-told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their fond imaginations,⁠—saving him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose eyelids curtain’d up their jewels dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion: yet hourly had he striven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hide the cankering venom, that had riven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fainting recollections. Now indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His senses had swoon’d off: he did not heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sudden silence, or the whispers low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the old eyes dissolving at his woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or anxious calls, or close of trembling palms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or maiden’s sigh, that grief itself embalms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the self-same fixed trance he kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one who on the earth had never stept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, even as dead-still as a marble man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frozen in that old tale Arabian.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Who whispers him so pantingly and close?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona, his sweet sister: of all those,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His friends, the dearest. Hushing signs she made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breathed a sister’s sorrow to persuade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A yielding up, a cradling on her care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eloquence did breathe away the curse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She led him, like some midnight spirit nurse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happy changes in emphatic dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along a path between two little streams,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guarding his forehead, with her round elbow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From low-grown branches, and his footsteps slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From stumbling over stumps and hillocks small;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until they came to where these streamlets fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mingled bubblings and a gentle rush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a river, clear, brimful, and flush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With crystal mocking of the trees and sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little shallop, floating there hard by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pointed its beak over the fringed bank;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon it lightly dipt, and rose, and sank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dipt again, with the young couple’s weight,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona guiding, through the water straight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards a bowery island opposite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which gaining presently, she steered light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a shady, fresh, and ripply cove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where nested was an arbour, overwove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By many a summer’s silent fingering;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whose cool bosom she was used to bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her playmates, with their needle broidery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And minstrel memories of times gone by.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So she was gently glad to see him laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under her favourite bower’s quiet shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On her own couch, new made of flower leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dried carefully on the cooler side of sheaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When last the sun his autumn tresses shook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the tann’d harvesters rich armfuls took.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon was he quieted to slumbrous rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, ere it crept upon him, he had prest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona’s busy hand against his lips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still, a-sleeping, held her finger-tips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tender pressure. And as a willow keeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A patient watch over the stream that creeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Windingly by it, so the quiet maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Held her in peace: so that a whispering blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of grass, a wailful gnat, a bee bustling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down in the bluebells, or a wren light rustling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among sere leaves and twigs, might all be heard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O magic sleep! O comfortable bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That broodest o’er the troubled sea of the mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it is hush’d and smooth! O unconfined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Restraint! imprison’d liberty! great key</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To golden palaces, strange minstrelsy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fountains grotesque, new trees, bespangled caves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Echoing grottoes, full of tumbling waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And moonlight; aye, to all the mazy world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of silvery enchantment!⁠—who, upfurl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath thy drowsy wing a triple hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But renovates and lives?⁠—Thus, in the bower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion was calm’d to life again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opening his eyelids with a healthier brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said: “I feel this thine endearing love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All through my bosom: thou art as a dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembling its closed eyes and sleeked wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About me; and the pearliest dew not brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such morning incense from the fields of May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As do those brighter drops that twinkling stray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From those kind eyes,⁠—the very home and haunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sisterly affection. Can I want</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aught else, aught nearer heaven, than such tears?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet dry them up, in bidding hence all fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, any longer, I will pass my days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone and sad. No, I will once more raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My voice upon the mountain-heights; once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make my horn parley from their foreheads hoar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again my trooping hounds their tongues shall loll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around the breathed boar: again I’ll poll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair-grown yew-tree, for a chosen bow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when the pleasant sun is getting low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again I’ll linger in a sloping mead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear the speckled thrushes, and see feed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our idle sheep. So be thou cheered, sweet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if thy lute is here, softly intreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul to keep in its resolved course.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Hereat Peona, in their silver source,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shut her pure sorrow-drops with glad exclaim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And took a lute, from which there pulsing came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lively prelude, fashioning the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which her voice should wander. ’Twas a lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More subtle cadenced, more forest wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Dryope’s lone lulling of her child;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing since has floated in the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So mournful strange. Surely some influence rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went, spiritual, through the damsel’s hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For still, with Delphic emphasis, she spann’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The quick invisible strings, even though she saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion’s spirit melt away and thaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the deep intoxication.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon she came, with sudden burst, upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her self-possession⁠—swung the lute aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And earnestly said: “Brother, ’tis vain to hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou dost know of things mysterious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immortal, starry; such alone could thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weigh down thy nature. Hast thou sinn’d in aught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Offensive to the heavenly powers? Caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Paphian dove upon a message sent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy deathful bow against some deer-herd bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sacred to Dian? Haply, thou hast seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her naked limbs among the alders green;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that, alas! is death! No, I can trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Something more high perplexing in thy face!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Endymion look’d at her, and press’d her hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “Art thou so pale, who wast so bland</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And merry in our meadows? How is this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me thine ailment: tell me all amiss!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! thou hast been unhappy at the change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrought suddenly in me. What indeed more strange?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or more complete to overwhelm surmise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ambition is no sluggard: ’tis no prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That toiling years would put within my grasp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I have sigh’d for: with so deadly gasp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No man e’er panted for a mortal love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So all have set my heavier grief above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things which happen. Rightly have they done:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, who still saw the horizontal sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heave his broad shoulder o’er the edge of the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out-facing Lucifer, and then had hurl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My spear aloft, as signal for the chase⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, who, for very sport of heart, would race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With my own steed from Araby; pluck down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vulture from his towery perching; frown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lion into growling, loth retire⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lose, at once, all my toil-breeding fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sink thus low! but I will ease my breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of secret grief, here in this bowery nest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“This river does not see the naked sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it begins to progress silverly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around the western border of the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence, from a certain spot, its winding flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seems at the distance like a crescent moon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in that nook, the very pride of June,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had I been used to pass my weary eves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rather for the sun unwilling leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So dear a picture of his sovereign power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I could witness his most kingly hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he doth tighten up the golden reins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And paces leisurely down amber plains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His snorting four. Now when his chariot last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its beams against the zodiac-lion cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There blossom’d suddenly a magic bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sacred ditamy, and poppies red:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which I wondered greatly, knowing well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That but one night had wrought this flowery spell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, sitting down close by, began to muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What it might mean. Perhaps, thought I, Morpheus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In passing here, his owlet pinions shook;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, it may be, ere matron Night uptook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her ebon urn, young Mercury, by stealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had dipt his rod in it: such garland wealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came not by common growth. Thus on I thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until my head was dizzy and distraught.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moreover, through the dancing poppies stole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A breeze, most softly lulling to my soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shaping visions all about my sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of colours, wings, and bursts of spangly light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which became more strange, and strange, and dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then were gulf’d in a tumultuous swim:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then I fell asleep. Ah, can I tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The enchantment that afterwards befell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet it was but a dream: yet such a dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never tongue, although it overteem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mellow utterance, like a cavern spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could figure out and to conception bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All I beheld and felt. Methought I lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watching the zenith, where the milky way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the stars in virgin splendour pours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And travelling my eye, until the doors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven appear’d to open for my flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I became loth and fearful to alight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From such high soaring by a downward glance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So kept me steadfast in that airy trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spreading imaginary pinions wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, presently, the stars began to glide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And faint away, before my eager view:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which I sigh’d that I could not pursue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dropt my vision to the horizon’s verge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! from opening clouds, I saw emerge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The loveliest moon, that ever silver’d o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shell for Neptune’s goblet; she did soar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So passionately bright, my dazzled soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commingling with her argent spheres did roll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through clear and cloudy, even when she went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last into a dark and vapoury tent⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat, methought, the lidless-eyed train</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of planets all were in the blue again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To commune with those orbs, once more I raised</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sight right upward: but it was quite dazed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a bright something, sailing down apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making me quickly veil my eyes and face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again I look’d, and, O ye deities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who from Olympus watch our destinies!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence that completed form of all completeness?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence came that high perfection of all sweetness?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speak, stubborn earth, and tell me where, O where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou a symbol of her golden hair?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not oat-sheaves drooping in the western sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not⁠—thy soft hand, fair sister! let me shun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such follying before thee⁠—yet she had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indeed, locks bright enough to make me mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they were simply gordian’d up and braided,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving, in naked comeliness, unshaded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her pearl round ears, white neck, and orbed brow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which were blended in, I know not how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a paradise of lips and eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blush-tinted cheeks, half-smiles, and faintest sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, when I think thereon, my spirit clings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plays about its fancy, till the stings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of human neighbourhood envenom all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto what awful power shall I call?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what high fane?⁠—Ah! see her hovering feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More bluely vein’d, more soft, more whitely sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than those of sea-born Venus, when she rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out her cradle shell. The wind out-blows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her scarf into a fluttering pavilion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis blue, and over-spangled with a million</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of little eyes, as though thou wert to shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the darkest, lushest bluebell bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Handfuls of daisies.”⁠—“Endymion, how strange!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dream within dream!”⁠—“She took an airy range,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, towards me, like a very maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came blushing, waning, willing, and afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And press’d me by the hand: Ah! ’twas too much;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methought I fainted at the charmed touch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet held my recollection, even as one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dives three fathoms where the waters run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gurgling in beds of coral: for anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I felt upmounted in that region</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where falling stars dart their artillery forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eagles struggle with the buffeting north</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That balances the heavy meteor-stone;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt too, I was not fearful, nor alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lapp’d and lull’d along the dangerous sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon, as it seem’d, we left our journeying high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And straightway into frightful eddies swoop’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as ay muster where gray time has scoop’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Huge dens and caverns in a mountain’s side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There hollow sounds aroused me, and I sigh’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To faint once more by looking on my bliss⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was distracted; madly did I kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wooing arms which held me, and did give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My eyes at once to death: but ’twas to live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take in draughts of life from the gold fount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of kind and passionate looks; to count, and count</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moments, by some greedy help that seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A second self, that each might be redeem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plunder’d of its load of blessedness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, desperate mortal! I ev’n dared to press</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her very cheek against my crowned lip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, at that moment, felt my body dip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a warmer air: a moment more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our feet were soft in flowers. There was store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of newest joys upon that alp. Sometimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A scent of violets, and blossoming limes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loiter’d around us; then of honey cells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made delicate from all white-flower bells;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once, above the edges of our nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An arch face peep’d,⁠—an Oread as I guess’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Why did I dream that sleep o’erpower’d me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In midst of all this heaven? Why not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far off, the shadows of his pinions dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stare them from me? But no, like a spark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That needs must die, although its little beam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reflects upon a diamond, my sweet dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell into nothing⁠—into stupid sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so it was, until a gentle creep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A careful moving caught my waking ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up I started: Ah! my sighs, my tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My clenched hands;⁠—for lo! the poppies hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dew-dabbled on their stalks, the ouzel sung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A heavy ditty, and the sullen day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had chidden herald Hesperus away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With leaden looks: the solitary breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bluster’d, and slept, and its wild self did tease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wayward melancholy; and I thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark me, Peona! that sometimes it brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint fare-thee-wells, and sigh-shrillcd adieus!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away I wander’d⁠—all the pleasant hues</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven and earth had faded: deepest shades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were deepest dungeons; heaths and sunny glades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were full of pestilent light; our taintless rills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem’d sooty, and o’erspread with upturn’d gills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dying fish; the vermeil rose had blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In frightful scarlet, and its thorns outgrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like spiked aloe. If an innocent bird</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before my heedless footsteps stirr’d, and stirr’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In little journeys, I beheld in it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A disguised demon, missioned to knit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul with under darkness; to entice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My stumblings down some monstrous precipice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I eager follow’d, and did curse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The disappointment. Time, that aged nurse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rock’d me to patience. Now, thank gentle heaven!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things, with all their comfortings, are given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my down-sunken hours, and with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet sister, help to stem the ebbing sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of weary life.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Thus ended he, and both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat silent: for the maid was very loth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To answer; feeling well that breathed words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would all be lost, unheard, and vain as swords</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the enchased crocodile, or leaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of grasshoppers against the sun. She weeps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wonders; struggles to devise some blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To put on such a look as would say, <em>Shame</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>On this poor weakness!</em> but, for all her strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She could as soon have crush’d away the life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From a sick dove. At length, to break the pause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She said with trembling chance: “Is this the cause?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This all? Yet it is strange, and sad, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one who through this middle earth should pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most like a sojourning demi-god, and leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His name upon the harp-string, should achieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No higher bard than simple maidenhood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singing alone, and fearfully,⁠—how the blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left his young cheek; and how he used to stray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew not where; and how he would say, <em>nay</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any said ’twas love: and yet ’twas love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What could it be but love? How a ringdove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let fall a sprig of yew-tree in his path;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how he died: and then, that love doth scathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gentle heart, as northern blasts do roses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the ballad of his sad life closes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sighs, and an alas!⁠—Endymion!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be rather in the trumpet’s mouth,⁠—anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the winds at large⁠—that all may hearken!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although, before the crystal heavens darken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I watch and dote upon the silver lakes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pictured in western cloudiness, that takes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The semblance of gold rocks and bright gold sands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Islands, and creeks, and amber-fretted strands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With horses prancing o’er them, palaces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And towers of amethyst,⁠—would I so tease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My pleasant days, because I could not mount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into those regions? The Morphean fount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that fine element that visions, dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fitful whims of sleep are made of, streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into its airy channels with so subtle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thin a breathing, not the spider’s shuttle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Circled a million times within the space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a swallow’s nest-door, could delay a trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tinting of its quality: how light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must dreams themselves be; seeing they’re more slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the mere nothing that engenders them!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then wherefore sully the entrusted gem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of high and noble life with thoughts so sick?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why pierce high-fronted honour to the quick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For nothing but a dream?” Hereat the youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look’d up: a conflicting of shame and ruth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was in his plaited brow: yet his eyelids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Widen’d a little, as when Zephyr bids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little breeze to creep between the fans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of careless butterflies: amid his pains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seem’d to taste a drop of manna-dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full palatable; and a colour grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his cheek, while thus he lifeful spake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Peona! ever have I long’d to slake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My thirst for the world’s praises: nothing base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No merely slumberous phantasm, could unlace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stubborn canvas for my voyage prepared⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though now ’tis tatter’d; leaving my bark bared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sullenly drifting: yet my higher hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is of too wide, too rainbow-large a scope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fret at myriads of earthly wrecks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein lies happiness? In that which becks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our ready minds to fellowship divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fellowship with essence; till we shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full alchemized, and free of space. Behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clear religion of heaven! Fold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rose leaf round thy finger’s taperness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soothe thy lips: hist, when the airy stress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of music’s kiss impregnates the free winds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a sympathetic touch unbinds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Æolian magic from their lucid wombs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then old songs waken from enclouded tombs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old ditties sigh above their father’s grave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ghosts of melodious prophesyings rave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round every spot where trod Apollo’s foot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bronze clarions awake, and faintly bruit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where long ago a giant battle was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, from the turf, a lullaby doth pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every place where infant Orpheus slept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feel we these things?⁠—that moment have we stept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a sort of oneness, and our state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is like a floating spirit’s. But there are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Richer entanglements, enthralments far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More self-destroying, leading, by degrees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the chief intensity: the crown of these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is made of love and friendship, and sits high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the forehead of humanity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All its more ponderous and bulky worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is friendship, whence there ever issues forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A steady splendour; but at the tip-top,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There hangs by unseen film, an orbed drop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of light, and that is love: its influence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrown in our eyes genders a novel sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which we start and fret: till in the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melting into its radiance, we blend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mingle, and so become a part of it,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor with aught else can our souls interknit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wingedly: when we combine therewith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life’s self is nourish’d by its proper pith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we are nurtured like a pelican brood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, so delicious is the unsating food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That men, who might have tower’d in the van</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the congregated world, to fan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And winnow from the coming step of time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All chaff of custom, wipe away all slime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left by men-slugs and human serpentry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have been content to let occasion die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst they did sleep in love’s Elysium.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, truly, I would rather be struck dumb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than speak against this ardent listlessness:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I have ever thought that it might bless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world with benefits unknowingly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As does the nightingale, up-perched high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cloister’d among cool and bunched leaves⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sings but to her love, nor e’er conceives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How tiptoe Night holds back her dark-gray hood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just so may love, although ’tis understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mere commingling of passionate breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Produce more than our searching witnesseth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What I know not: but who, of men, can tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That flowers would bloom, or that green fruit would swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To melting pulp, that fish would have bright mail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth its dower of river, wood, and vale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The meadows runnels, runnels pebble-stones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seed its harvest, or the lute its tones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tones ravishment, or ravishment its sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If human souls did never kiss and greet?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Now, if this earthly love has power to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men’s being mortal, immortal; to shake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ambition from their memories, and brim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their measure of content; what merest whim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seems all this poor endeavour after fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To one, who keeps within his steadfast aim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A love immortal, an immortal too.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look not so wilder’d; for these things are true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never can be born of atomies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That buzz about our slumbers, like brain-flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving us fancy-sick. No, no, I’m sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My restless spirit never could endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To brood so long upon one luxury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless it did, though fearfully, espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hope beyond the shadow of a dream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sayings will the less obscured seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I have told thee how my waking sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has made me scruple whether that same night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was pass’d in dreaming. Hearken, sweet Peona!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the matron-temple of Latona,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which we should see but for these darkening boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies a deep hollow, from whose ragged brows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bushes and trees do lean all round athwart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And meet so nearly, that with wings outraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spreaded tail, a vulture could not glide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past them, but he must brush on every side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some moulder’d steps lead into this cool cell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far as the slabbed margin of a well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose patient level peeps its crystal eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right upward, through the bushes, to the sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft have I brought thee flowers, on their stalks set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like vestal primroses, but dark velvet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Edges them round, and they have golden pits:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas there I got them, from the gaps and slits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a mossy stone, that sometimes was my seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all above was faint with mid-day heat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there in strife no burning thoughts to heed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’d bubble up the water through a reed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So reaching back to boyhood: make me ships</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of moulted feathers, touchwood, alder chips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With leaves stuck in them; and the Neptune be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their petty ocean. Oftener, heavily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When lovelorn hours had left me less a child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sat contemplating the figures wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of o’erhead clouds melting the mirror through.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a day, while thus I watch’d, by flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cloudy Cupid, with his bow and quiver;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So plainly character’d, no breeze would shiver</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The happy chance: so happy, I was fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To follow it upon the open plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, therefore, was just going; when, behold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wonder, fair as any I have told⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same bright face I tasted in my sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiling in the clear well. My heart did leap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the cool depth.⁠—It moved as if to flee⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I started up, when lo! refreshfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came upon my face, in plenteous showers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dew-drops, and dewy buds, and leaves, and flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrapping all objects from my smother’d sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bathing my spirit in a new delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, such a breathless honey-feel of bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone preserved me from the drear abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of death, for the fair form had gone again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasure is oft a visitant; but pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clings cruelly to us, like the gnawing sloth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the deer’s tender haunches: late, and loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis scared away by slow returning pleasure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How sickening, how dark the dreadful leisure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of weary days, made deeper exquisite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a foreknowledge of unslumbrous night!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like sorrow came upon me, heavier still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than when I wander’d from the poppy hill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a whole age of lingering moments crept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sluggishly by, ere more contentment swept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away at once the deadly yellow spleen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, thrice have I this fair enchantment seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once more been tortured with renewed life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When last the wintry gusts gave over strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the conquering sun of spring, and left the skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm and serene, but yet with moisten’d eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pity of the shatter’d infant buds,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That time thou didst adorn, with amber studs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My hunting cap, because I laugh’d and smiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chatted with thee, and many days exiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All torment from my breast;⁠—’twas even then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straying about, yet coop’d up in the den</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of helpless discontent,⁠—hurling my lance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From place to place, and following at chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last, by hap, through some young trees it struck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, plashing among bedded pebbles, stuck</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the middle of a brook,⁠—whose silver ramble</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down twenty little falls through reeds and bramble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tracing along, it brought me to a cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence it ran brightly forth, and white did lave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nether sides of mossy stones and rock,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mong which it gurgled blithe adieus, to mock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its own sweet grief at parting. Overhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung a lush screen of drooping weeds, and spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thick, as to curtain up some wood-nymph’s home.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Ah! impious mortal, whither do I roam!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said I, low-voiced: ‘Ah, whither! ’Tis the grot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Proserpine, when Hell, obscure and hot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth her resign; and where her tender hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She dabbles, on the cool and sluicy sands:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ’tis the cell of Echo, where she sits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And babbles thorough silence, till her wits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are gone in tender madness, and anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faints into sleep, with many a dying tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sadness. O that she would take my vows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breathe them sighingly among the boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sue her gentle ears for whose fair head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daily, I pluck sweet flowerets from their bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And weave them dyingly⁠—send honey-whispers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round every leaf, that all those gentle lispers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May sigh my love unto her pitying!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O charitable Echo! hear, and sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This ditty to her!⁠—tell her’⁠—So I stay’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My foolish tongue, and listening, half afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood stupefied with my own empty folly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blushing for the freaks of melancholy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Salt tears were coming, when I heard my name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most fondly lipp’d, and then these accents came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Endymion! the cave is secreter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the isle of Delos. Echo hence shall stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sighs but sigh-warm kisses, or light noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy combing hand, the while it travelling cloys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trembles through my labyrinthine hair.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At that oppress’d, I hurried in.⁠—Ah! where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are those swift moments? Whither are they fled?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll smile no more, Peona; nor will wed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sorrow, the way to death; but patiently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bear up against it: so farewell, sad sigh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And come instead demurest meditation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To occupy me wholly, and to fashion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My pilgrimage for the world’s dusky brink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more will I count over, link by link,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My chain of grief: no longer strive to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A half-forgetfulness in mountain wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blustering about my ears: aye, thou shalt see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dearest of sisters, what my life shall be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What a calm round of hours shall make my days.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a paly flame of hope that plays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where’er I look; but yet, I’ll say ’tis naught⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here I bid it die. Have not I caught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already, a more healthy countenance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By this the sun is setting; we may chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meet some of our near-dwellers with my car.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">This said, he rose, faint-smiling like a star</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through autumn mists, and took Peona’s hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stept into the boat, and launch’d from land.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="endymion-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O sovereign power of love! O grief! O balm!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All records, saving thine, come cool, and calm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shadowy, through the mist of passed years:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For others, good or bad, hatred and tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have become indolent; but touching thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One sigh doth echo, one poor sob doth pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One kiss brings honey-dew from buried days.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The woes of Troy, towers smothering o’er their blaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stiff-holden shields, far-piercing spears, keen blades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struggling, and blood, and shrieks⁠—all dimly fades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into some backward corner of the brain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, in our very souls, we feel amain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The close of Troïlus and Cressid sweet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence, pageant history! hence, gilded cheat!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swart planet in the universe of deeds!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide sea, that one continuous murmur breeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the pebbled shore of memory!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many old rotten-timber’d boats there be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon thy vaporous bosom, magnified</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To goodly vessels; many a sail of pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And golden-keel’d, is left unlaunch’d and dry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wherefore this? What care, though owl did fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the great Athenian admiral’s mast?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What care, though striding Alexander past</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Indus with his Macedonian numbers?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though old Ulysses tortured from his slumbers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glutted Cyclops, what care?⁠—Juliet leaning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid her window-flowers,⁠—sighing,⁠—weaning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tenderly her fancy from its maiden snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth more avail than these; the silver flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hero’s tears, the swoon of Imogen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair Pastorella in the bandit’s den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are things to brood on with more ardency</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the death-day of empires. Fearfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must such conviction come upon his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, thus far, discontent, has dared to tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without one muse’s smile, or kind behest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The path of love and poesy. But rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In chafing restlessness, is yet more drear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than to be crush’d, in striving to uprear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s standard on the battlements of song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So once more days and nights aid me along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like legion’d soldiers.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Brain-sick shepherd-prince,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What promise hast thou faithful guarded since</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day of sacrifice? Or, have new sorrows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come with the constant dawn upon thy morrows?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! ’tis his old grief. For many days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has he been wandering in uncertain ways:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through wilderness, and woods of mossed oaks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Counting his woe-worn minutes, by the strokes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the lone wood-cutter; and listening still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hour after hour, to each lush-leaved rill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now he is sitting by a shady spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And elbow-deep with feverous fingering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stems the upbursting cold: a wild rose tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pavilions him in bloom, and he doth see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bud which snares his fancy: lo! but now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He plucks it, dips its stalk in the water: how!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It swells, it buds, it flowers beneath his sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in the middle, there is softly pight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A golden butterfly; upon whose wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There must be surely character’d strange things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with wide eye he wonders, and smiles oft.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Lightly this little herald flew aloft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow’d by glad Endymion’s clasped hands:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward it flies. From languor’s sullen bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His limbs are loosed, and eager, on he hies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dazzled to trace it in the sunny skies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seem’d lie flew, the way so easy was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like a new-born spirit did he pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the green evening quiet in the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er many a heath, through many a woodland dun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through buried paths, where sleepy twilight dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The summer time away. One track unseams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wooded cleft, and, far away, the blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ocean fades upon him; then, anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sinks adown a solitary glen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where there was never sound of mortal men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saving, perhaps, some snow-light cadences</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melting to silence, when upon the breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some holy bark let forth an anthem sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cheer itself to Delphi. Still his feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went swift beneath the merry-winged guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until it reach’d a splashing fountain’s side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, near a cavern’s mouth, for ever pour’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the temperate air: then high it soar’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, downward, suddenly began to dip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if, athirst with so much toil, ’twould sip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crystal spout-head: so it did, with touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most delicate, as though afraid to smutch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even with mealy gold, the waters clear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, at that very touch, to disappear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fairy-quick, was strange! Bewildered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion sought around, and shook each bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of covert flowers in vain; and then he flung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself along the grass. What gentle tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What whisperer, disturb’d his gloomy rest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a nymph uprisen to the breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the fountain’s pebbly margin, and she stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mong lilies, like the youngest of the brood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him her dripping hand she softly kist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And anxiously began to plait and twist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her ringlets round her fingers, saying: “Youth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too long, alas, hast thou starved on the ruth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bitterness of love: too long indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing thou art so gentle. Could I weed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul of care, by heavens, I would offer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the bright riches of my crystal coffer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Amphitrite; all my clear-eyed fish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Golden, or rainbow-sided, or purplish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vermilion-tail’d, or finn’d with silvery gauze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, or my veined pebble-floor, that draws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A virgin light to the deep; my grotto-sands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tawny and gold, oozed slowly from far lands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By my diligent springs: my level lilies, shells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My charming rod, my potent river spells;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, every thing, even to the pearly cup</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meander gave me,⁠—for I bubbled up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fainting creatures in a desert wild.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But woe is me, I am but as a child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gladden thee; and all I dare to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is, that I pity thee; that on this day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve been thy guide; that thou must wander far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In other regions, past the scanty bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mortal steps, before thou canst be ta’en</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From every wasting sigh, from every pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the gentle bosom of thy love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why it is thus, one knows in heaven above:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, a poor Naiad, I guess not. Farewell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have a ditty for my hollow cell.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Hereat she vanish’d from Endymion’s gaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who brooded o’er the water in amaze:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dashing fount pour’d on, and where its pool</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay, half asleep, in grass and rushes cool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quick waterflies and gnats were sporting still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fish were dimpling, as if good nor ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had fallen out that hour. The wanderer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holding his forehead to keep off the burr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of smothering fancies, patiently sat down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, while beneath the evening’s sleepy frown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glowworms began to trim their starry lamps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus breathed he to himself: “Whoso encamps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take a fancied city of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O what a wretch is he! and when ’tis his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After long toil and travelling, to miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kernel of his hopes, how more than vile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, for him there’s refreshment even in toil:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another city doth he set about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free from the smallest pebble-bead of doubt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he will seize on trickling honey-combs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas, he finds them dry; and then he foams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And onward to another city speeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this is human life: the war, the deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The disappointment, the anxiety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imagination’s struggles, far and nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All human; bearing in themselves this good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they are still the air, the subtle food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make us feel existence, and to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How quiet death is. Where soil is, men grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether to weeds or flowers; but for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no depth to strike in: I can see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naught earthly worth my compassing; so stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a misty, jutting head of land⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone? No, no; and by the Orphean lute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When mad Eurydice is listening to ’t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’d rather stand upon this misty peak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With not a thing to sigh for, or to seek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the soft shadow of my thrice seen love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than be⁠—I care not what. O meekest dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven! O Cynthia, ten times bright and fair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thy blue throne, now filling all the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glance but one little beam of temper’d light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into my bosom, that the dreadful night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tyranny of love be somewhat scared!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet do not so, sweet queen; one torment spared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would give a pang to jealous misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worse than the torment’s self: but rather tie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Large wings upon my shoulders, and point out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My love’s far dwelling. Though the playful rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Cupids shun thee, too divine art thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too keen in beauty, for thy silver prow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to have dipp’d in love’s most gentle stream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O be propitious, nor severely deem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My madness impious; for, by all the stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tend thy bidding, I do think the bars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That kept my spirit in are burst⁠—that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am sailing with thee through the dizzy sky!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How beautiful thou art! The world how deep!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How tremulous-dazzlingly the wheels sweep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around their axle! Then these gleaming reins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How lithe! When this thy chariot attains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its airy goal, haply some bower veils</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those twilight eyes? Those eyes!⁠—my spirit fails⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear goddess, help! or the wide gaping air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will gulf me⁠—help!”⁠—At this, with madden’d stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lifted hands, and trembling lips, he stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like old Deucalion mountain’d o’er the flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or blind Orion hungry for the morn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, but from the deep cavern there was borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A voice, he had been froze to senseless stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor sigh of his, nor plaint, nor passion’d moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had more been heard. Thus swell’d it forth: “Descend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young mountaineer! descend where alleys bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the sparry hollows of the world!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft hast thou seen bolts of the thunder hurl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As from thy threshold; day by day hast been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little lower than the chilly sheen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of icy pinnacles, and dipp’dst thine arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the deadening ether that still charms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their marble being: now, as deep profound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As those are high, descend! He ne’er is crown’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With immortality, who fears to follow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where airy voices lead: so through the hollow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silent mysteries of earth, descend!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He heard but the last words, nor could contend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One moment in reflection: for he fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the fearful deep, to hide his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the clear moon, the trees, and coming madness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">’Twas far too strange, and wonderful for sadness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sharpening, by degrees, his appetite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dive into the deepest. Dark, nor light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The region; nor bright, nor sombre wholly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But mingled up; a gleaming melancholy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dusky empire and its diadems;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One faint eternal eventide of gems.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, millions sparkled on a vein of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along whose track the prince quick footsteps told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all its lines abrupt and angular:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out-shooting sometimes, like a meteor-star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through a vast antre; then the metal woof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Vulcan’s rainbow, with some monstrous roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Curves hugely: now, far in the deep abyss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seems an angry lightning, and doth hiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fancy into belief: anon it leads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through winding passages, where sameness breeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vexing conceptions of some sudden change;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether to silver grots, or giant range</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sapphire columns, or fantastic bridge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Athwart a flood of crystal. On a ridge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now fareth he, that o’er the vast beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towers like an ocean-cliff, and whence he seeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hundred waterfalls, whose voices come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as the murmuring surge. Chilly and numb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bosom grew, when first he, far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descried an orbed diamond, set to fray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Darkness from his throne: ’twas like the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uprisen o’er chaos: and with such a stun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came the amazement, that, absorb’d in it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw not fiercer wonders⁠—past the wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of any spirit to tell, but one of those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, when this planet’s sphering time doth close</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will be its high remembrancers: who they?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty ones who have made eternal day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Greece and England. While astonishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With deep-drawn sighs was quieting, he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a marble gallery, passing through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mimic temple, so complete and true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sacred custom, that he well nigh fear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To search it inwards; whence far off appear’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through a long pillar’d vista, a fair shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, just beyond, on light tiptoe divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A quiver’d Dian. Stepping awfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youth approach’d; oft turning his veil’d eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down sidelong aisles, and into niches old:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when, more near against the marble cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had touch’d his forehead, he began to thread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All courts and passages, where silence dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roused by his whispering footsteps, murmur’d faint:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And long he traversed to and fro, to acquaint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself with every mystery, and awe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, weary, he sat down before the maw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a wide outlet, fathomless and dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wild uncertainty and shadows grim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, when new wonders ceased to float before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thoughts of self came on, how crude and sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The journey homeward to habitual self!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mad pursuing of the fog-born elf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose flitting lantern, through rude nettle-brier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cheats us into a swamp, into a fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the bosom of a hated thing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">What misery most drowningly doth sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In lone Endymion’s ear, now he has raught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goal of consciousness? Ah, ’tis the thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deadly feel of solitude: for lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cannot see the heavens, nor the flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rivers, nor hill-flowers running wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pink and purple chequer, nor, up-piled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cloudy rack slow journeying in the west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like herded elephants; nor felt, nor prest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cool grass, nor tasted the fresh slumberous air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But far from such companionship to wear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An unknown time, surcharged with grief, away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was now his lot. And must he patient stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tracing fantastic figures with his spear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No!” exclaim’d he, “why should I tarry here?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No! loudly echoed times innumerable.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which he straightway started, and ’gan tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His paces back into the temple’s chief;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warming and glowing strong in the belief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of help from Dian: so that when again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He caught her airy form, thus did he plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moving more near the while: “O Haunter chaste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of river sides, and woods, and heathy waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where with thy silver bow and arrows keen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou now forested? O woodland Queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What smoothest air thy smoother forehead woos?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where dost thou listen to the wide halloos</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy disparted nymphs? Through what dark tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glimmers thy crescent? Wheresoe’er it be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis in the breath of heaven: thou dost taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freedom as none can taste it, nor dost waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy loveliness in dismal elements;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, finding in our green earth sweet contents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There livest blissfully. Ah, if to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It feels Elysian, how rich to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An exiled mortal, sounds its pleasant name!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within my breast there lives a choking flame⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me cool ’t the zephyr-boughs among!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A homeward fever parches up my tongue⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me slake it at the running springs!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my ear a noisy nothing rings⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me once more hear the linnet’s note!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before mine eyes thick films and shadows float⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me ’noint them with the heaven’s light!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost thou now lave thy feet and ankles white?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O think how sweet to me the freshening sluice!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost thou now please thy thirst with berry-juice?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O think how this dry palate would rejoice!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in soft slumber thou dost hear my voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O think how I should love a bed of flowers!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young goddess! let me see my native bowers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deliver me from this rapacious deep!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thus ending loudly, as he would o’erleap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His destiny, alert he stood: but when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obstinate silence came heavily again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeling about for its old couch of space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And airy cradle, lowly bow’d his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desponding, o’er the marble floor’s cold thrill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ’twas not long; for, sweeter than the rill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To its old channel, or a swollen tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To margin sallows, were the leaves he spied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flowers, and wreaths, and ready myrtle crowns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upheaping through the slab: refreshment drowns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Itself, and strives its own delights to hide⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor in one spot alone; the floral pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a long whispering birth enchanted grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before his footsteps; as when heaved anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old ocean rolls a lengthened wave to the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down whose green back the short-lived foam, all hoar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bursts gradual, with a wayward indolence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Increasing still in heart, and pleasant sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his fairy journey on he hastes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So anxious for the end, he scarcely wastes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One moment with his hand among the sweets:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward he goes⁠—he stops⁠—his bosom beats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As plainly in his ear, as the faint charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which the throbs were born. This still alarm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This sleepy music, forced him walk tiptoe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it came more softly than the east could blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arion’s magic to the Atlantic isles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or than the west, made jealous by the smiles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of throned Apollo, could breathe back the lyre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seas Ionian and Tyrian.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O did he ever live, that lonely man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who loved⁠—and music slew not? ’Tis the pest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love, that fairest joys give most unrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That things of delicate and tenderest worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are swallow’d all, and made a seared dearth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By one consuming flame: it doth immerse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suffocate true blessings in a curse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-happy, by comparison of bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is miserable. ’Twas even so with this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dew-dropping melody, in the Carian’s ear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First heaven, then hell, and then forgotten clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vanish’d in elemental passion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And down some swart abysm he had gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not a heavenly guide benignant led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where thick myrtle branches, ’gainst his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brushing, awakened: then the sounds again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went noiseless as a passing noontide rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over a bower, where little space he stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as the sunset peeps into a wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So saw he panting light, and towards it went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through winding alleys; and lo, wonderment!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon soft verdure saw, one here, one there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cupids a-slumbering on their pinions fair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">After a thousand mazes overgone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last, with sudden step, he came upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A chamber, myrtle-wall’d, embower’d high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of light, incense, tender minstrelsy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And more of beautiful and strange beside:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For on a silken couch of rosy pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In midst of all, there lay a sleeping youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fondest beauty; fonder, in fair sooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than sighs could fathom, or contentment reach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And coverlids gold-tinted like the peach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ripe October’s faded marigolds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell sleek about him in a thousand folds⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not hiding up an Apollonian curve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of neck and shoulder, nor the tenting swerve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of knee from knee, nor ankles pointing light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rather, giving them to the fill’d sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Officiously. Sideway his face reposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On one white arm, and tenderly unclosed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By tenderest pressure, a faint damask mouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To slumbery pout; just as the morning south</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disparts a dew-lipp’d rose. Above his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Four lily stalks did their white honours wed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make a coronal; and round him grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All tendrils green, of every bloom and hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together intertwin’d and trammell’d fresh:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vine of glossy sprout; the ivy mesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shading its Ethiop berries; and woodbine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of velvet-leaves and bugle-blooms divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Convolvulus in streaked vases flush;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The creeper, mellowing for an autumn blush;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And virgin’s bower, trailing airily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With others of the sisterhood. Hard by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood serene Cupids watching silently.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One, kneeling to a lyre, touch’d the strings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Muffling to death the pathos with his wings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, ever and anon, uprose to look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the youth’s slumber; while another took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A willow bough, distilling odorous dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shook it on his hair; another flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In through the woven roof, and fluttering-wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rain’d violets upon his sleeping eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">At these enchantments, and yet many more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breathless Latmian wonder’d o’er and o’er;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until impatient in embarrassment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He forthright pass’d, and lightly treading went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that same feather’d lyrist, who straightway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiling, thus whisper’d: “Though from upper day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art a wanderer, and thy presence here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might seem unholy, be of happy cheer!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ’tis the nicest touch of human honour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When some ethereal and high-favouring donor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presents immortal bowers to mortal sense;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As now ’tis done to thee, Endymion. Hence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was I in no wise startled. So recline</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon these living flowers. Here is wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alive with sparkles⁠—never, I aver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Ariadne was a vintager,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So cool a purple: taste these juicy pears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sent me by sad Vertumnus, when his fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were high about Pomona: here is cream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deepening to richness from a snowy gleam;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweeter than that nurse Amalthea skimm’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the boy Jupiter: and here, undimm’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By any touch, a bunch of blooming plums</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ready to melt between an infant’s gums:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here is manna pick’d from Syrian trees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In starlight, by the three Hesperides.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feast on, and meanwhile I will let thee know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all these things around us.” He did so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still brooding o’er the cadence of his lyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus: “I need not any hearing tire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By telling how the sea-born goddess pined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a mortal youth, and how she strove to bind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him all in all unto her doating self.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who would not be so prison’d? but, fond elf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was content to let her amorous plea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint through his careless arms; content to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An unseized heaven dying at his feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Content, O fool! to make a cold retreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When on the pleasant grass such love, love-lorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay sorrowing; when every tear was born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of diverse passion; when her lips and eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were closed in sullen moisture, and quick sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came vex’d and pettish through her nostrils small.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hush! no exclaim⁠—yet, justly might’st thou call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Curses upon his head.⁠—I was half glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my poor mistress went distract and mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the boar tusk’d him: so away she flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Jove’s high throne, and by her plainings drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immortal tear-drops down the thunderer’s beard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereon, it was decreed he should be rear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each summer-time to life. Lo! this is he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That same Adonis, safe in the privacy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this still region all his winter-sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, sleep; for when our love-sick queen did weep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over his waned corse, the tremulous shower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heal’d up the wound, and, with a balmy power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Medicined death to a lengthened drowsiness:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which she fills with visions, and doth dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all this quiet luxury; and hath set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us young immortals, without any let,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To watch his slumber through. ’Tis well nigh pass’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even to a moment’s filling up, and fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She scuds with summer breezes, to pant through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first long kiss, warm firstling, to renew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embower’d sports in Cytherea’s isle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look! how those winged listeners all this while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stand anxious: see! behold!”⁠—This clamant word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broke through the careful silence; for they heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rustling noise of leaves, and out there flutter’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pigeons and doves: Adonis something mutter’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The while one hand, that erst upon his thigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay dormant, moved convulsed and gradually</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to his forehead. Then there was a hum</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sudden voices, echoing, “Come! come!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arise! awake! Clear summer has forth walk’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the clover-sward, and she has talk’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full soothingly to every nested finch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rise, Cupids! or we’ll give the bluebell pinch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To your dimpled arms. Once more sweet life begin!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this, from every side they hurried in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rubbing their sleepy eyes with lazy wrists,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doubling overhead their little fists</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In backward yawns. But all were soon alive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, as delicious wine doth, sparkling, dive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In nectar’d clouds and curls through water fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from the arbour roof down swell’d an air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Odorous and enlivening; making all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To laugh, and play, and sing, and loudly call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For their sweet queen; when lo! the wreathed green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disparted, and far upward could be seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blue heaven, and a silver car, air-borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose silent wheels, fresh wet from clouds of morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spun off a drizzling dew,⁠—which falling chill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On soft Adonis’ shoulders, made him still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nestle and turn uneasily about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon were the white doves plain, with necks stretch’d out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And silken traces lighten’d in descent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon, returning from love’s banishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Queen Venus leaning downward open-arm’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her shadow fell upon his breast, and charm’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tumult to his heart, and a new life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into his eyes. Ah, miserable strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for her comforting! unhappy sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But meeting her blue orbs! Who, who can write</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these first minutes? The unchariest muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To embracements warm as theirs makes coy excuse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O it has ruffled every spirit there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saving Love’s self, who stands superb to share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The general gladness: awfully he stands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sovereign quell is in his waving hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sight can bear the lightning of his bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His quiver is mysterious, none can know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What themselves think of it; from forth his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There darts strange light of varied hues and dyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A scowl is sometimes on his brow, but who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look full upon it feel anon the blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his fair eyes run liquid through their souls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion feels it, and no more controls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The burning prayer within him; so, bent low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had begun a plaining of his woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Venus, bending forward, said: “My child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Favour this gentle youth; his days are wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With love⁠—he⁠—but alas! too well I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou know’st the deepness of his misery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, smile not so, my son: I tell thee true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when through heavy hours I used to rue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The endless sleep of this new-born Adon’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This stranger ay I pitied. For upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dreary morning once I fled away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the breezy clouds, to weep and pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this my love: for vexing Mars had teased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me even to tears; thence, when a little eased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down-looking, vacant, through a hazy wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw this youth as he despairing stood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those same dark curls blown vagrant in the wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those same full fringed lids a constant blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over his sullen eyes: I saw him throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself on wither’d leaves, even as though</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death had come sudden; for no jot he moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet mutter’d wildly. I could hear he loved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some fair immortal, and that his embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had zoned her through the night. There is no trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this in heaven: I have mark’d each cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And find it is the vainest thing to seek;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that of all things ’tis kept secretest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion! one day thou wilt be blest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So still obey the guiding hand that fends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee safely through these wonders for sweet ends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis a concealment needful in extreme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if I guessed not so, the sunny beam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shouldst mount up with me. Now adieu!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here must we leave thee.”⁠—At these words upflew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The impatient doves, uprose the floating car,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up went the hum celestial. High afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latmian saw them minish into naught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when all were clear vanish’d, still he caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vivid lightning from that dreadful bow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all was darken’d, with Ætnean throe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth closed⁠—gave a solitary moan⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left him once again in twilight lone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He did not rave, he did not stare aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all those visions were o’ergone, and past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he in loneliness: he felt assured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happy times, when all he had endured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would seem a feather to the mighty prize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, with unusual gladness, on he hies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through caves, and palaces of mottled ore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gold dome, and crystal wall, and turquois floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Black polish’d porticoes of awful shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, at the last, a diamond balustrade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leading afar past wild magnificence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spiral through ruggedest loopholes, and thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretching across a void, then guiding o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enormous chasms, where, all foam and roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Streams subterranean tease their granite beds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then heighten’d just above the silvery heads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a thousand fountains, so that he could dash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The waters with his spear; but at the splash,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Done heedlessly, those spouting columns rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sudden a poplar’s height, and ’gan to enclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His diamond path with fretwork, streaming round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alive, and dazzling cool, and with a sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply, like dolphin tumults, when sweet shells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Welcome the float of Thetis. Long he dwells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this delight; for, every minute’s space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The streams with changed magic interlace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes like delicatest lattices,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cover’d with crystal vines; then weeping trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moving about as in a gentle wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, in a wink, to watery gauze refined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pour’d into shapes of curtain’d canopies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spangled, and rich with liquid broideries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flowers, peacocks, swans, and naiads fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swifter than lightning went these wonders rare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the water, into stubborn streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Collecting, mimick’d the wrought oaken beams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pillars, and frieze, and high fantastic roof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those dusk places in times far aloof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cathedrals call’d. He bade a loth farewell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To these founts Protean, passing gulf, and dell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And torrent, and ten thousand jutting shapes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half seen through deepest gloom, and griesly gapes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blackening on every side, and overhead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vaulted dome like Heaven’s, far bespread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With starlight gems: aye, all so huge and strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The solitary felt a hurried change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Working within him into something dreary,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vex’d like a morning eagle, lost, and weary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And purblind amid foggy, midnight wolds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he revives at once: for who beholds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New sudden things, nor casts his mental slough?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth from a rugged arch, in the dusk below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came mother Cybele! alone⁠—alone⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sombre chariot; dark foldings thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About her majesty, and front death-pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With turrets crown’d. Four maned lions hale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sluggish wheels; solemn their toothed maws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their surly eyes brow-hidden, heavy paws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uplifted drowsily, and nervy tails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cowering their tawny brushes. Silent sails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This shadowy queen athwart, and faints away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In another gloomy arch.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Wherefore delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young traveller, in such a mournful place?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou wayworn, or canst not further trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The diamond path? And does it indeed end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abrupt in middle air? Yet earthward bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy forehead, and to Jupiter cloud-borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call ardently! He was indeed wayworn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abrupt, in middle air, his way was lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cloud-borne Jove he bowed, and there crost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards him a large eagle, ’twixt whose wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without one impious word, himself he flings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Committed to the darkness and the gloom:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down, down, uncertain to what pleasant doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift as a fathoming plummet down he fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through unknown things; till exhaled asphodel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rose, with spicy fannings interbreathed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came swelling forth where little caves were wreathed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thick with leaves and mosses, that they seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Large honeycombs of green, and freshly teem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With airs delicious. In the greenest nook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eagle landed him, and farewell took.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">It was a jasmine bower, all bestrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With golden moss. His every sense had grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ethereal for pleasure; ’bove his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flew a delight half-graspable; his tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Hesperean; to his capable ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silence was music from the holy spheres;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dewy luxury was in his eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little flowers felt his pleasant sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stirr’d them faintly. Verdant cave and cell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wander’d through, oft wondering at such swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sudden exaltation: but, “Alas!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said he, “will all this gush of feeling pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away in solitude? And must they wane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like melodies upon a sandy plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without an echo? Then shall I be left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sad, so melancholy, so bereft!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet still I feel immortal! O my love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My breath of life, where art thou? High above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dancing before the morning gates of heaven?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or keeping watch among those starry seven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Atlas’ children? Art a maid of the waters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of shell-winding Triton’s bright-hair’d daughters?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or art, impossible! a nymph of Dian’s,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weaving a coronal of tender scions</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For very idleness? Where’er thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methinks it now is at my will to start</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into thine arms; to scare Aurora’s train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And snatch thee from the morning; o’er the main</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To scud like a wild bird, and take thee off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thy sea-foamy cradle; or to doff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy shepherd vest, and woo thee ’mid fresh leaves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, no, too eagerly my soul deceives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its powerless self: I know this cannot be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me then by some sweet dreaming flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her entrancements: hither sleep awhile!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hither most gentle sleep! and soothing foil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For some few hours the coming solitude.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thus spake he, and that moment felt endued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With power to dream deliciously; so wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through a dim passage, searching till he found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The smoothest mossy bed and deepest, where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He threw himself, and just into the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretching his indolent arms, he took, O bliss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A naked waist: “Fair Cupid, whence is this?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A well-known voice sigh’d, “Sweetest, here am I!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which soft ravishment, with doting cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They trembled to each other.⁠—Helicon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O fountain’d hill! Old Homer’s Helicon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou wouldst spout a little streamlet o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These sorry pages; then the verse would soar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sing above this gentle pair, like lark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over his nested young: but all is dark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around thine aged top, and thy clear fount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exhales in mists to heaven. Aye, the count</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mighty Poets is made up; the scroll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is folded by the Muses; the bright roll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is in Apollo’s hand: our dazed eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have seen a new tinge in the western skies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world has done its duty. Yet, oh yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although the sun of poesy is set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These lovers did embrace, and we must weep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That there is no old power left to steep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A quill immortal in their joyous tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long time in silence did their anxious fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Question that thus it was: long time they lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fondling and kissing every doubt away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long time ere soft caressing sobs began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mellow into words, and then there ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two bubbling springs of talk from their sweet lips.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O known Unknown! from whom my being sips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such darling essence, wherefore may I not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be ever in these arms? in this sweet spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pillow my chin for ever? ever press</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These toying hands and kiss their smooth excess?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why not for ever and for ever feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That breath about my eyes? Ah, thou wilt steal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away from me again, indeed, indeed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wilt be gone away, and wilt not heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lonely madness. Speak, delicious fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is⁠—is it to be so? No! Who will dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pluck thee from me? And, of thine own will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full well I feel thou wouldst not leave me. Still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me entwine thee surer, surer⁠—now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How can we part? Elysium! Who art thou?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, that thou canst not be for ever here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or lift me with thee to some starry sphere?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enchantress! tell me by this soft embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the most soft completion of thy face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those lips, O slippery blisses, twinkling eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by these tenderest, milky sovereignties⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These tenderest, and by the nectar-wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The passion”⁠—“O doved Ida the divine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion! dearest! Ah, unhappy me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soul will ’scape us⁠—O felicity!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How he does love me! His poor temples beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the very tune of love⁠—how sweet, sweet, sweet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revive, dear youth, or I shall faint and die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revive, or these soft hours will hurry by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tranced dullness; speak, and let that spell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affright this lethargy! I cannot quell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its heavy pressure, and will press at least</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lips to thine, that they may richly feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until we taste the life of love again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What! dost thou move? dost kiss? O bliss! O pain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love thee, youth, more than I can conceive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so long absence from thee doth bereave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul of any rest: yet must I hence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, can I not to starry eminence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uplift thee; nor for very shame can own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself to thee. Ah, dearest, do not groan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or thou wilt force me from this secrecy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I must blush in heaven. O that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had done it already; that the dreadful smiles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At my lost brightness, my impassion’d wiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had waned from Olympus’ solemn height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from all serious Gods; that our delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was quite forgotten, save of us alone!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wherefore so ashamed? ’Tis but to atone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For endless pleasure, by some coward blushes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet must I be a coward!⁠—Honour rushes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too palpable before me⁠—the sad look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Jove⁠—Minerva’s start⁠—no bosom shook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With awe of purity⁠—no Cupid pinion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In reverence veiled⁠—my crystalline dominion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half lost, and all old hymns made nullity!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what is this to love? O I could fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thee into the ken of heavenly powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thou wouldst thus, for many sequent hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press me so sweetly. Now I swear at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I am wise, that Pallas is a dunce⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps her love like mine is but unknown⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O I do think that I have been alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In chastity: yes, Pallas has been sighing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While every eve saw me my hair uptying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fingers cool as aspen leaves. Sweet love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was as vague as solitary dove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor knew that nests were built. Now a soft kiss⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, by that kiss, I vow an endless bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An immortality of passion’s thine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere long I will exalt thee to the shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven ambrosial; and we will shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ourselves whole summers by a river glade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will tell thee stories of the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breathe thee whispers of its minstrelsy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My happy love will overwing all bounds!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me melt into thee; let the sounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of our close voices marry at their birth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us entwine hoveringly⁠—O dearth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of human words! roughness of mortal speech!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lispings empyrean will I sometime teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine honey’d tongue⁠—lute-breathings which I gasp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have thee understand, now while I clasp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee thus, and weep for fondness⁠—I am pain’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion: woe! woe! is grief contain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the very deeps of pleasure, my sole life?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hereat, with many sobs, her gentle strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melted into a languor. He return’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entranced vows and tears.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Ye who have yearn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With too much passion, will here stay and pity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the mere sake of truth; as ’tis a ditty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not of these days, but long ago ’twas told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a cavern wind unto a forest old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the forest told it in a dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a sleeping lake, whose cool and level gleam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A poet caught as he was journeying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Phœbus’ shrine; and in it he did fling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His weary limbs, bathing an hour’s space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after, straight in that inspired place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sang the story up into the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giving it universal freedom. There</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has it been ever sounding for those ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose tips are glowing hot. The legend cheers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yon sentinel stars; and he who listens to it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must surely be self-doom’d or he will rue it:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For quenchless burnings come upon the heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made fiercer by a fear lest any part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should be engulfed in the eddying wind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As much as here is penn’d doth always find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A resting-place, thus much comes clear and plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon the strange voice is upon the wane⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’tis but echoed from departing sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the fair visitant at last unwound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her gentle limbs, and left the youth asleep.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus the tradition of the gusty deep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Now turn we to our former chroniclers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion awoke, that grief of hers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet paining on his ear: he sickly guess’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How lone he was once more, and sadly press’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His empty arms together, hung his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And most forlorn upon that widow’d bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat silently. Love’s madness he had known:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Often with more than tortured lion’s groan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moanings had burst from him; but now that rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had pass’d away: no longer did he wage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rough-voiced war against the dooming stars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, he had felt too much for such harsh jars:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lyre of his soul Æolian tuned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgot all violence, and but communed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With melancholy thought: O he had swoon’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drunken from pleasure’s nipple; and his love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Henceforth was dove-like.⁠—Loth was he to move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the imprinted couch, and when he did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas with slow, languid paces, and face hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In muffling hands. So temper’d, out he stray’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half seeing visions that might have dismay’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alecto’s serpents; ravishments more keen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Hermes’ pipe, when anxious he did lean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over eclipsing eyes: and at the last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a sounding grotto, vaulted, vast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erstudded with a thousand, thousand pearls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crimson-mouthed shells with stubborn curls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every shape and size, even to the bulk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which whales harbour close, to brood and sulk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against an endless storm. Moreover too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fish-semblances, of green and azure hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ready to snort their streams. In this cool wonder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion sat down, and ’gan to ponder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On all his life: his youth, up to the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When ’mid acclaim, and feasts, and garlands gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stept upon his shepherd throne: the look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his white palace in wild forest nook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the revels he had lorded there:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each tender maiden whom he once thought fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With every friend and fellow-woodlander⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass’d like a dream before him. Then the spur</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the old bards to mighty deeds: his plans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To nurse the golden age ’mong shepherd clans:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wondrous night: the great Pan festival:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sister’s sorrow; and his wanderings all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until into the earth’s deep maw he rush’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all its buried magic, till it flush’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High with excessive love. “And now,” thought he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How long must I remain in jeopardy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of blank amazements that amaze no more?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I have tasted her sweet soul to the core,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All other depths are shallow; essences,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once spiritual, are like muddy lees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meant but to fertilize my earthly root,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make my branches lift a golden fruit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the bloom of heaven: other light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though it be quick and sharp enough to blight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Olympian eagle’s vision, is dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark as the parentage of chaos. Hark!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My silent thoughts are echoing from these shells;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or they are but the ghosts, the dying swells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of noises far away?⁠—list!”⁠—Hereupon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He kept an anxious ear. The humming tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came louder, and behold, there as he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On either side outgush’d, with misty spray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A copious spring; and both together dash’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift, mad, fantastic round the rocks, and lash’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the conchs and shells of the lofty grot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving a trickling dew. At last they shot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down from the ceiling’s height, pouring a noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of some breathless racers whose hopes poise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the last few steps, and with spent force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the ground they took a winding course.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion follow’d⁠—for it seem’d that one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever pursued, the other strove to shun⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow’d their languid mazes, till well nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had left thinking of the mystery,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was now rapt in tender hoverings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the vanish’d bliss. Ah? what is it sings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His dream away? What melodies are these?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They sound as through the whispering of trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not native in such barren vaults. Give ear!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“O Arethusa, peerless nymph! why fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such tenderness as mine? Great Dian, why,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why didst thou hear her prayer? O that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were rippling round her dainty fairness now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Circling about her waist, and striving how</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To entice her to a dive! then stealing in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between her luscious lips and eyelids thin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O that her shining hair was in the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I distilling from it thence to run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In amorous rillets down her shrinking form!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To linger on her lily shoulders, warm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between her kissing breasts, and every charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touch raptured!⁠—see how painfully I flow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair maid, be pitiful to my great woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stay, stay thy weary course, and let me lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A happy wooer, to the flowery mead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all that beauty snared me.”⁠—“Cruel god,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desist! or my offended mistress’ nod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will stagnate all thy fountains:⁠—tease me not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With siren words⁠—Ah, have I really got</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such power to madden thee? And is it true⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away, away, or I shall dearly rue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My very thoughts: in mercy then away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kindest Alpheus, for should I obey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My own dear will, ’twould be a deadly bane.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O, Oread-Queen! would that thou hadst a pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like this of mine, then would I fearless turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be a criminal.” “Alas, I burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shudder⁠—gentle river, get thee hence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alpheus! thou enchanter! every sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mine was once made perfect in these woods.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh breezes, bowery lawns, and innocent floods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ripe fruits, and lonely couch, contentment gave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ever since I heedlessly did lave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thy deceitful stream, a panting glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew strong within me: wherefore serve me so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And call it love? Alas! ’twas cruelty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not once more did I close my happy eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the thrush’s song. Away! avaunt!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O ’twas a cruel thing.”⁠—“Now thou dost taunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So softly, Arethusa, that I think</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou wast playing on my shady brink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wouldst bathe once again. Innocent maid!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stifle thine heart no more;⁠—nor be afraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of angry powers: there are deities</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will shade us with their wings. Those fitful sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis almost death to hear: O let me pour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dewy balm upon them!⁠—fear no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet Arethusa! Dian’s self must feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes these very pangs. Dear maiden, steal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blushing into my soul, and let us fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These dreary caverns for the open sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will delight thee all my winding course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the green sea up to my hidden source</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About Arcadian forests; and will show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The channels where my coolest waters flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through mossy rocks; where ’mid exuberant green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I roam in pleasant darkness, more unseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Saturn in his exile; where I brim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round flowery islands, and take thence a skim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mealy sweets, which myriads of bees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Buzz from their honey’d wings: and thou shouldst please</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself to choose the richest, where we might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be incense-pillow’d every summer night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doff all sad fears, thou white deliciousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let us be thus comforted; unless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou couldst rejoice to see my hopeless stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurry distracted from Sol’s temperate beam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pour to death along some hungry sands.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What can I do, Alpheus? Dian stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Severe before me: persecuting fate!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unhappy Arethusa! thou wast late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A huntress free in”⁠—At this, sudden fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those two sad streams adown a fearful dell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latmian listen’d, but he heard no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save echo, faint repeating o’er and o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The name of Arethusa. On the verge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that dark gulf he wept, and said; “I urge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, gentle Goddess of my pilgrimage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By our eternal hopes, to soothe, to assuage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou art powerful, these lovers’ pains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make them happy in some happy plains.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He turn’d⁠—there was a whelming sound⁠—he stept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a cooler light; and so he kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards it by a sandy path, and lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More suddenly than doth a moment go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The visions of the earth were gone and fled⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw the giant sea above his head.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="endymion-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>There are who lord it o’er their fellow-men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With most prevailing tinsel: who unpen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their baaing vanities, to browse away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The comfortable green and juicy hay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From human pastures; or, O torturing fact!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, through an idiot blink, will see unpack’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fire-branded foxes to sear up and singe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our gold and ripe-ear’d hopes. With not one tinge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sanctuary splendour, not a sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Able to face an owl’s, they still are dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the blear-eyed nations in empurpled vests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crowns, and turbans. With unladen breasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save of blown self-applause, they proudly mount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To their spirit’s perch, their being’s high account,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their tiptop nothings, their dull skies, their thrones⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the fierce intoxicating tones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of trumpets, shoutings, and belabour’d drums,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sudden cannon. Ah! how all this hums,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In wakeful ears, like uproar past and gone⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like thunder-clouds that spake to Babylon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And set those old Chaldeans to their tasks.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are then regalities all gilded masks?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, there are throned seats unscalable</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by a patient wing, a constant spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or by ethereal things that, unconfined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can make a ladder of the eternal wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And poise about in cloudy thunder-tents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To watch the abysm-birth of elements.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, ’bove the withering of old-lipp’d Fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand Powers keep religious state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In water, fiery realm, and airy bourne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, silent as a consecrated urn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hold spherey sessions for a season due.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet few of these far majesties, ah, few!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have bared their operations to this globe⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Few, who with gorgeous pageantry enrobe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our piece of heaven⁠—whose benevolence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shakes hand with our own Ceres; every sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Filling with spiritual sweets to plenitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As bees gorge full their cells. And, by the feud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt Nothing and Creation, I here swear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eterne Apollo! that thy Sister fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is of all these the gentlier-mightiest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thy gold breath is misting in the west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She unobserved steals unto her throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there she sits most meek and most alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if she had not pomp subservient;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if thine eye, high Poet! was not bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards her with the Muses in thine heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the minist’ring stars kept not apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waiting for silver-footed messages.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Moon! the oldest shades ’mong oldest trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feel palpitations when thou lookest in:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Moon! old boughs lisp forth a holier din</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The while they feel thine airy fellowship.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou dost bless everywhere, with silver lip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kissing dead things to life. The sleeping kine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Couch’d in thy brightness, dream of fields divine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Innumerable mountains rise, and rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ambitious for the hallowing of thine eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet thy benediction passeth not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One obscure hiding-place, one little spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where pleasure may be sent: the nested wren</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has thy fair face within its tranquil ken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from beneath a sheltering ivy leaf</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takes glimpses of thee; thou art a relief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the poor patient oyster, where it sleeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within its pearly house.⁠—The mighty deeps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monstrous sea is thine⁠—the myriad sea!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Moon! far-spooming Ocean bows to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Tellus feels his forehead’s cumbrous load.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Cynthia! where art thou now? What far abode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of green or silvery bower doth enshrine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such utmost beauty? Alas, thou dost pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one as sorrowful: thy cheek is pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one whose cheek is pale: thou dost bewail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tears, who weeps for thee. Where dost thou sigh?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! surely that light peeps from Vesper’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or what a thing is love! ’Tis She, but lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How changed, how full of ache, how gone in woe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She dies at the thinnest cloud; her loveliness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is wan on Neptune’s blue: yet there’s a stress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love-spangles, just off yon cape of trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dancing upon the waves, as if to please</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The curly foam with amorous influence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, not so idle: for down-glancing thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fathoms eddies, and runs wild about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erwhelming water-courses; scaring out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thorny sharks from hiding-holes, and fright’ning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their savage eyes with unaccustom’d lightning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where will the splendour be content to reach?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O love! how potent hast thou been to teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange journeyings! Wherever beauty dwells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In gulf or aerie, mountains or deep dells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In light, in gloom, in star or blazing sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou pointest out the way, and straight ’tis won.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid his toil thou gavest Leander breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou leddest Orpheus through the gleams of death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou madest Pluto bear thin element;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now, O winged Chieftain! thou hast sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A moonbeam to the deep, deep water-world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find Endymion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">On gold sand impearl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lily shells, and pebbles milky white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor Cynthia greeted him, and soothed her light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against his pallid face: he felt the charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To breathlessness, and suddenly a warm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his heart’s blood: ’twas very sweet; he stay’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wandering steps, and half-entranced laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head upon a tuft of straggling weeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To taste the gentle moon, and freshening beads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lash’d from the crystal roof by fishes’ tails.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so he kept, until the rosy veils</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mantling the east, by Aurora’s peering hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were lifted from the water’s breast, and fann’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into sweet air; and sober’d morning came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meekly through billows:⁠—when like taper-flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left sudden by a dallying breath of air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rose in silence, and once more ’gan fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along his fated way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Far had he roam’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With nothing save the hollow vast, that foam’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above, around, and at his feet; save things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More dead than Morpheus’ imaginings:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old rusted anchors, helmets, breastplates large</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gone sea-warriors: brazen beaks and targe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rudders that for a hundred years had lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sway of human hand; gold vase emboss’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With long-forgotten story, and wherein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No reveller had ever dipp’d a chin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But those of Saturn’s vintage; mouldering scrolls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writ in the tongue of heaven, by those souls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who first were on the earth; and sculptures rude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ponderous stone, developing the mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ancient Nox;⁠—then skeletons of man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of beast, behemoth, and leviathan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And elephant, and eagle, and huge jaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of nameless monster. A cold leaden awe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These secrets struck into him; and unless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dian had chased away that heaviness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He might have died: but now, with cheered feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He onward kept; wooing these thoughts to steal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the labyrinth in his soul of love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“What is there in thee. Moon! that thou shouldst move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart so potently? When yet a child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I oft have dried my tears when thou hast smiled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou seem’dst my sister: hand in hand we went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From eve to morn across the firmament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No apples would I gather from the tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till thou hadst cool’d their cheeks deliciously:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No tumbling water ever spake romance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when my eyes with thine thereon could dance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No woods were green enough, no bower divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until thou liftedst up thine eyelids fine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sowing-time ne’er would I dibble take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or drop a seed, till thou wast wide awake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in the summer tide of blossoming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No one but thee hath heard me blithely sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mesh my dewy flowers all the night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No melody was like a passing spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it went not to solemnize thy reign.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, in my boyhood, every joy and pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thee were fashion’d to the self-same end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as I grew in years, still didst thou blend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all my ardours; thou wast the deep glen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wast the mountain-top⁠—the sage’s pen⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poet’s harp⁠—the voice of friends⁠—the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wast the river⁠—thou wast glory won;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wast my clarion’s blast⁠—thou wast my steed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My goblet full of wine⁠—my topmost deed:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wast the charm of women, lovely Moon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O what a wild and harmonized tune</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My spirit struck from all the beautiful!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On some bright essence could I lean, and lull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself to immortality: I prest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature’s soft pillow in a wakeful rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But gentle Orb! there came a nearer bliss⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My strange love came⁠—Felicity’s abyss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She came, and thou didst fade, and fade away⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet not entirely: no, thy starry sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has been an under-passion to this hour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I begin to feel thine orby power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is coming fresh upon me: O be kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep back thine influence, and do not blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sovereign vision.⁠—Dearest love, forgive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I can think away from thee and live!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pardon me, airy planet, that I prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One thought beyond thine argent luxuries!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How far beyond!” At this a surprised start</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frosted the springing verdure of his heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as he lifted up his eyes to swear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How his own goddess was past all things fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw far in the concave green of the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An old man sitting calm and peacefully.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a weeded rock this old man sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his white hair was awful, and a mat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of weeds were cold beneath his cold thin feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, ample as the largest winding-sheet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cloak of blue wrapp’d up his aged bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erwrought with symbols by the deepest groans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ambitious magic: every ocean-form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was woven in with black distinctness; storm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And calm, and whispering, and hideous roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quicksand, and whirlpool, and deserted shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were emblem’d in the woof; with every shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That skims, or dives, or sleeps, ’twixt cape and cape.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gulphing whale was like a dot in the spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet look upon it, and ’twould size and swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To its huge self; and the minutest fish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would pass the very hardest gazer’s wish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And show his little eye’s anatomy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then there was pictured the regality</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Neptune; and the sea-nymphs round his state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In beauteous vassalage, look up and wait.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside this old man lay a pearly wand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his lap a book, the which he conn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So steadfastly, that the new denizen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had time to keep him in amazed ken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mark these shadowings, and stand in awe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The old man raised his hoary head and saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wilder’d stranger⁠—seeming not to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His features were so lifeless. Suddenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He woke as from a trance: his snow-white brows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went arching up, and like two magic ploughs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Furrow’d deep wrinkles in his forehead large,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which kept as fixedly as rocky marge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till round his wither’d lips had gone a smile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then up he rose, like one whose tedious toil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had watch’d for years in forlorn hermitage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who had not from mid-life to utmost age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eased in one accent his o’erburden’d soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even to the trees. He rose: he grasp’d his stole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With convulsed clenches waving it abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a voice of solemn joy, that awed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Echo into oblivion, he said:⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Thou art the man! Now shall I lay my head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In peace upon my watery pillow: now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleep will come smoothly to my weary brow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Jove! I shall be young again, be young!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O shell-borne Neptune, I am pierced and stung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With new-born life! What shall I do? Where go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I have cast this serpent-skin of woe?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll swim to the sirens, and one moment listen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their melodies, and see their long hair glisten;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon upon that giant’s arm I’ll be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That writhes about the roots of Sicily:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To northern seas I’ll in a twinkling sail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mount upon the snortings of a whale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To some black cloud; thence down I’ll madly sweep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On forked lightning, to the deepest deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where through some sucking pool I will be hurl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With rapture to the other side of the world!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, I am full of gladness! Sisters three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bow full-hearted to your old decree!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, every god be thank’d, and power benign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I no more shall wither, droop, and pine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the man!” Endymion started back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dismay’d; and, like a wretch from whom the rack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tortures hot breath, and speech of agony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mutter’d: “What lonely death am I to die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this cold region? Will he let me freeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And float my brittle limbs o’er polar seas?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or will he touch me with his searing hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leave a black memorial on the sand?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or tear me piecemeal with a bony saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And keep me as a chosen food to draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His magian fish through hated fire and flame?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O misery of hell! resistless, tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am I to be burnt up? No, I will shout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the gods through heaven’s blue look out!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Tartarus! but some few days agone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her soft arms were entwining me, and on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her voice I hung like fruit among green leaves:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her lips were all my own, and⁠—ah, ripe sheaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happiness! ye on the stubble droop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But never may be garner’d. I must stoop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My head, and kiss death’s foot. Love! love, farewell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is there no hope from thee? This horrid spell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would melt at thy sweet breath.⁠—By Dian’s hind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeding from her white fingers, on the wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see thy streaming hair! and now, by Pan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I care not for this old mysterious man!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He spake, and walking to that aged form,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look’d high defiance. Lo! his heart ’gan warm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pity, for the gray-hair’d creature wept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had he then wrong’d a heart where sorrow kept?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had he, though blindly contumelious, brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rheum to kind eyes, a sting to human thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Convulsion to a mouth of many years?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had in truth; and he was ripe for tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The penitent shower fell, as down he knelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before that care-worn sage, who trembling felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About his large dark locks, and faltering spake:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Arise, good youth, for sacred Phœbus’ sake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know thine inmost bosom, and I feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A very brother’s yearning for thee steal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into mine own: for why? thou openest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prison gates that have so long opprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My weary watching. Though thou kuow’st it not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art commission’d to this fated spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For great enfranchisement. O weep no more!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am a friend to love, to loves of yore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, hadst thou never loved an unknown power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had been grieving at this joyous hour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But even now most miserable old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw thee, and my blood no longer cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave mighty pulses: in this tottering case</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew a new heart, which at this moment plays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As dancingly as thine. Be not afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou shalt hear this secret all display’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now as we speed towards our joyous task.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So saying, this young soul in age’s mask</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went forward with the Carian side by side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resuming quickly thus; while ocean’s tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung swollen at their backs, and jewell’d sands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took silently their foot-prints.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“My soul stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now past the midway from mortality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so I can prepare without a sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell thee briefly all my joy and pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was a fisher once, upon this main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my boat danced in every creek and bay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rough billows were my home by night and day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sea-gulls not more constant; for I had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No housing from the storm and tempests mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hollow rocks⁠—and they were palaces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of silent happiness, of slumberous ease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long years of misery have told me so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, thus it was one thousand years ago.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One thousand years!⁠—Is it then possible</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To look so plainly through them? to dispel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand years with backward glance sublime?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To breathe away as ’twere all scummy slime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From off a crystal pool, to see its deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one’s own image from the bottom peep?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes: now I am no longer wretched thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My long captivity and moanings all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are but a slime, a thin-pervading scum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which I breathe away, and thronging come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like things of yesterday my youthful pleasures:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“I touch’d no lute, I sang not, trod no measures:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was a lonely youth on desert shores.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sports were lonely, ’mid continuous roars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And craggy isles, and sea-mew’s plaintive cry⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plaining discrepant between sea and sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dolphins were still my playmates; shapes unseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would let me feel their scales of gold and green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor be my desolation; and, full oft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When a dread waterspout had rear’d aloft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its hungry hugeness, seeming ready ripe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To burst with hoarsest thunderings, and wipe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My life away like a vast sponge of fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some friendly monster, pitying my sad state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has dived to its foundations, gulf’d it down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left me tossing safely. But the crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all my life was utmost quietude:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More did I love to lie in cavern rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keeping in wait whole days for Neptune’s voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if it came at last, hark, and rejoice!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There blush’d no summer eve but I would steer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My skiff along green shelving coasts, to hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shepherd’s pipe come clear from aery steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mingled with ceaseless bleatings of his sheep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never was a day of summer shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I beheld its birth upon the brine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I would watch all night to see unfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven’s gates, and Æthon snort his morning gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide o’er the swelling streams: and constantly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At brim of day-tide on some grassy lea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My nets would be spread out, and I at rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poor folk of the sea-country I blest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With daily boon of fish most delicate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They knew not whence this bounty, and elate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would strew sweet flowers on a sterile beach.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Why was I not contented? Wherefore reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At things which, but for thee, O Latmian!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had been my dreary death? Fool! I began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feel distemper’d longings: to desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The utmost privilege that ocean’s sire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could grant in benediction: to be free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all his kingdom. Long in misery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wasted, ere in one extremest fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I plunged for life or death. To interknit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One’s senses with so dense a breathing stuff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might seem a work of pain; so not enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can I admire how crystal-smooth it felt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And buoyant round my limbs. At first I dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whole days and days in sheer astonishment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetful utterly of self-intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moving but with the mighty ebb and flow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, like a new-fledged bird that flrst doth show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spreaded feathers to the morrow chill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I tried in fear the pinions of my will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas freedom! and at once I visited</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ceaseless wonders of this ocean-bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No need to tell thee of them, for I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou hast been a witness⁠—it must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For these I know thou canst not feel a drouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the melancholy corners of that mouth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I will in my story straightway pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To more immediate matter. Woe, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That love should be my bane! Ah, Scylla fair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why did poor Glaucus ever⁠—ever dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sue thee to his heart? Kind stranger-youth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I loved her to the very white of truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she would not conceive it. Timid thing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fled me swift as sea-bird on the wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round every isle, and point, and promontory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From where large Hercules wound up his story</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far as Egyptian Nile. My passion grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more, the more I saw her dainty hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gleam delicately through the azure clear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until ’twas too fierce agony to bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in that agony, across my grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It flash’d, that Circe might find some relief⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cruel enchantress! So above the water</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I rear’d my head, and look’d for Phœbus’ daughter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ææa’s isle was wondering at the moon:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seem’d to whirl around me, and a swoon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left me dead-drifting to that fatal power.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“When I awoke, ’twas in a twilight bower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just when the light of morn, with hum of bees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stole through its verdurous matting of fresh trees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How sweet, and sweeter! for I heard a lyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over it a sighing voice expire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It ceased⁠—I caught light footsteps; and anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fairest face that morn e’er look’d upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Push’d through a screen of roses. Starry Jove!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tears, and smiles, and honey-words she wove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A net whose thraldom was more bliss than all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The range of flower’d Elysium. Thus did fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dew of her rich speech: ‘Ah! art awake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me hear thee speak, for Cupid’s sake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am so oppress’d with joy! Why, I have shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An urn of tears, as though thou wert cold dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now I find thee living, I will pour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From these devoted eyes their silver store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until exhausted of the latest drop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So it will pleasure thee, and force thee stop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, that I too may live: but if beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such cool and sorrowful offerings, thou art fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of soothing warmth, of dalliance supreme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou art ripe to taste a long love-dream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If smiles, if dimples, tongues for ardour mute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hang in thy vision like a tempting fruit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me pluck it for thee!’ Thus she link’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her charming syllables, till indistinct</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their music came to my o’er-sweeten’d soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then she hover’d over me, and stole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So near, that if no nearer it had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This furrow’d visage thou hadst never seen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Young man of Latmos! thus particular</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am I, that thou may’st plainly see how far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This fierce temptation went: and thou may’st not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exclaim, How, then, was Scylla quite forgot?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Who could resist? Who in this universe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She did so breathe ambrosia; so immerse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fine existence in a golden clime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took me like a child of suckling time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cradled me in roses. Thus condemn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The current of my former life was stemm’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to this arbitrary queen of sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bow’d a tranced vassal: nor would thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have moved, even though Amphion’s harp had woo’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me back to Scylla o’er the billows rude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as Apollo each eve doth devise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A new apparelling for western skies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So every eve, nay, every spendthrift hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shed balmy consciousness within that bower.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I was free of haunts umbrageous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could wander in the mazy forest-house</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of squirrels, foxes shy, and antler’d deer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And birds from coverts innermost and drear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warbling for very joy mellifluous sorrow⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me new-born delights!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“Now let me borrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For moments few, a temperament as stern</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Pluto’s sceptre, that my words not burn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These uttering lips, while I in calm speech tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How specious heaven was changed to real hell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“One morn she left me sleeping; half awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sought for her smooth arms and lips, to slake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My greedy thirst with nectarous camel-draughts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she was gone. Whereat the barbed shafts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of disappointment stuck in me so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That out I ran and search’d the forest o’er.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wandering about in pine and cedar gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Damp awe assail’d me; for there ’gan to boom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sound of moan, an agony of sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sepulchral from the distance all around.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then came a conquering earth-thunder, and rumbled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fierce complain to silence: while I stumbled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down a precipitous path, as if impell’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I came to a dark valley.⁠—Groanings swell’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poisonous about my ears, and louder grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nearer I approach’d a flame’s gaunt blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That glared before me through a thorny brake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This fire, like the eye of gordian snake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bewitch’d me towards; and I soon was near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sight too fearful for the feel of fear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thicket hid I cursed the haggard scene⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The banquet of my arms, my arbour queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seated upon an uptorn forest root;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all around her shapes, wizard and brute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laughing, and wailing, grovelling, serpenting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showing tooth, tusk, and venom-bag, and sting!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O such deformities! old Charon’s self,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should he give up awhile his penny pelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take a dream ’mong rushes Stygian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It could not be so fantasied. Fierce, wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tyrannizing was the lady’s look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As over them a gnarled staff she shook.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ofttimes upon the sudden she laugh’d out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from a basket emptied to the rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clusters of grapes, the which they raven’d quick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And roar’d for more; with many a hungry lick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About their shaggy jaws. Avenging, slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon she took a branch of mistletoe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And emptied on ’t a black dull-gurgling phial:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groan’d one and all, as if some piercing trial</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was sharpening for their pitiable bones.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She lifted up the charm: appealing groans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From their poor breasts went sueing to her ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain; remorseless as an infant’s bier</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She whisk’d against their eyes the sooty oil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat was heard a noise of painful toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Increasing gradual to a tempest rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shrieks, yells, and groans of torture-pilgrimage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until their grieved bodies ’gan to bloat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And puff from the tail’s end to stifled throat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then was appalling silence: then a sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More wildering than all that hoarse affright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the whole herd, as by a whirlwind writhen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went through the dismal air like one huge Python</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Antagonizing Boreas,⁠—and so vanish’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet there was not a breath of wind: she banish’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These phantoms with a nod. Lo! from the dark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came waggish fauns, and nymphs, and satyrs stark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dancing and loud revelry,⁠—and went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swifter than centaurs after rapine bent.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighing an elephant appear’d and bow’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the fierce witch, speaking thus aloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In human accent: ‘Potent goddess! chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of pains resistless! make my being brief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or let me from this heavy prison fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or give me to the air, or let me die!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sue not for my happy crown again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sue not for my phalanx on the plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sue not for my lone, my widow’d wife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sue not for my ruddy drops of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My children fair, my lovely girls and boys!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will forget them; I will pass these joys;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ask nought so heavenward, so too⁠—too high:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only I pray, as fairest boon, to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or be deliver’d from this cumbrous flesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From this gross, detestable, filthy mesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And merely given to the cold bleak air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have mercy. Goddess! Circe, feel my prayer!’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“That curst magician’s name fell icy numb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my wild conjecturing: truth had come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naked and sabre-like against my heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw a fury whetting a death-dart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my slain spirit, overwrought with fright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fainted away in that dark lair of night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think, my deliverer, how desolate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My waking must have been! disgust, and hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And terrors manifold divided me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A spoil amongst them. I prepared to flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the dungeon core of that wild wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fled three days⁠—when lo! before me stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glaring the angry witch. O Dis, even now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A clammy dew is beading on my brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At mere remembering her pale laugh, and curse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Ha! ha! Sir Dainty! there must be a nurse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made of rose-leaves and thistle-down, express,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cradle thee my sweet, and lull thee: yes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am too flinty-hard for thy nice touch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My tenderest squeeze is but a giant’s clutch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, fairy-thing, it shall have lullabies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unheard of yet; and it shall still its cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon some breast more lily-feminine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, no⁠—it shall not pine, and pine, and pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than one pretty, trifling thousand years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then ’twere pity, but fate’s gentle shears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cut short its immortality. Sea-flirt!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young dove of the waters! truly I’ll not hurt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One hair of thine: see how I weep and sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That our heart-broken parting is so nigh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And must we part? Ah, yes, it must be so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet ere thou leavest me in utter woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me sob over thee my last adieus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And speak a blessing: Mark me! thou hast thews</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immortal, for thou art of heavenly race:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But such a love is mine, that here I chase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternally away from thee all bloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of youth, and destine thee towards a tomb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence shalt thou quickly to the watery vast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there, ere many days be overpast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disabled age shall seize thee; and even then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt not go the way of aged men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But live and wither, cripple and still breathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten hundred years: which gone, I then bequeath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy fragile bones to unknown burial.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu, sweet love, adieu!’⁠—As shot stars fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fled ere I could groan for mercy. Stung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And poisoned was my spirit: despair sung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A war-song of defiance ’gainst all hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hand was at my shoulder to compel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sullen steps; another ’fore my eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moved on with pointed finger. In this guise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enforced, at the last by ocean’s foam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I found me; by my fresh, my native home.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its tempering coolness, to my life akin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came salutary as I waded in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a blind voluptuous rage, I gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Battle to the swollen billow-ridge, and drave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Large froth before me, while yet there remain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hale strength, nor from my bones all marrow drain’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Young lover, I must weep⁠—such hellish spite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dry cheek who can tell? While thus my might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proving upon this element, dismay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a dead thing’s face my hand I laid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I look’d⁠—’twas Scylla! Cursed, cursed Circe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O vulture-witch, hast never heard of mercy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could not thy harshest vengeance be content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou must nip this tender innocent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because I lov’d her?⁠—Cold, O cold indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were her fair limbs, and like a common weed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sea-swell took her hair. Dead as she was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I clung about her waist, nor ceased to pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fleet as an arrow through unfathom’d brine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until there shone a fabric crystalline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ribb’d and inlaid with coral, pebble, and pearl.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Headlong I darted: at one eager swirl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gain’d its bright portal, enter’d, and behold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas vast, and desolate, and icy-cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all around⁠—But wherefore this to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in few minutes more thyself shalt see?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I left poor Scylla in a niche and fled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fever’d parchings up, my scathing dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Met palsy half way: soon these limbs became</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gaunt, wither’d, sapless, feeble, cramp’d, and lame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Now let me pass a cruel, cruel space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without one hope, without one faintest trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mitigation, or redeeming bubble</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of colour’d phantasy: for I fear ’twould trouble</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy brain to loss of reason: and next tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How a restoring chance came down to quell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One half of the witch in me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“On a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitting upon a rock above the spray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw grow up from the horizon’s brink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gallant vessel: soon she seem’d to sink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away from me again, as though her course</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had been resumed in spite of hindering force⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So vanish’d: and not long, before arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark clouds, and muttering of winds morose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Æolus would stifle his mad spleen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But could not; therefore, all the billows green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toss’d up the silver spume against the clouds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tempest came: I saw that vessel’s shrouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In perilous bustle; while upon the deck</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood trembling creatures. I beheld the wreck;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The final gulfing; the poor struggling souls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard their cries amid loud thunder-rolls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O they had all been saved but crazed eld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Annull’d my vigorous cravings; and thus quell’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And curb’d, think on ’t, O Latmian! did I sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writhing with pity, and a cursing fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against that hell-born Circe. The crew had gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By one and one, to pale oblivion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I was gazing on the surges prone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a scalding tear, and many a groan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When at my feet emerged an old man’s hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grasping this scroll, and this same slender wand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I knelt with pain⁠—reach’d out my hand⁠—had grasp’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These treasures⁠—touch’d the knuckles⁠—they un-clasp’d⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I caught a finger; but the downward weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erpower’d me⁠—it sank. Then ’gan abate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The storm, and through chill aguish gloom outburst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The comfortable sun. I was athirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To search the book, and in the warming air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parted its dripping leaves with eager care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange matters did it treat of, and drew on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul page after page, till well nigh won</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into forgetfulness; when, stupefied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I read these words, and read again, and tried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My eyes against the heavens, and read again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O what a load of misery and pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each Atlas-line bore off!⁠—a shine of hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came gold around me, cheering me to cope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strenuous with hellish tyranny. Attend!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou hast brought their promise to an end.”</span>
				</p>
				<p class="excerpt">
					<span class="i1">In the wide sea there lives a forlorn wretch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doom’d with enfeebled carcase to outstretch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His loath’d existence through ten centuries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then to die alone. Who can devise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A total opposition? No one. So</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One million times ocean must ebb and flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he oppressed. Yet he shall not die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things accomplish’d:⁠—If he utterly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scans all the depths of magic, and expounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The meanings of all motions, shapes, and sounds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he explores all forms and substances</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straight homeward to their symbol-essences;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shall not die. Moreover, and in chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He must pursue this task of joy and grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most piously;⁠—all lovers tempest-tost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the savage overtchelming lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shall deposit side by side, until</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time’s creeping shall the dreary space fulfil:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which done, and all these labours ripened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A youth, by heavenly power loved and led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall stand before him; whom he shall direct</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How to consummate all. The youth elect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must do the thing, or both will be destroyed.⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Then,” cried the young Endymion, overjoy’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“We are twin brothers in this destiny!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, I entreat thee, what achievement high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is, in this restless world, for me reserved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What! if from thee my wandering feet had swerved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had we both perish’d?”⁠—“Look!” the sage replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Dost thou not mark a gleaming through the tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of divers brilliances? ’tis the edifice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I told thee of, where lovely Scylla lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where I have enshrined piously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All lovers, whom fell storms have doom’d to die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throughout my bondage.” Thus discoursing, on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They went till unobscured the porches shone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which hurryingly they gain’d, and enter’d straight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sure never since king Neptune held his state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was seen such wonder underneath the stars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn to some level plain where haughty Mars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has legion’d all his battle; and behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How every soldier, with firm foot, doth hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His even breast: see, many steeled squares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rigid ranks of iron⁠—whence who dares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One step? Imagine further, line by line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These warrior thousands on the field supine;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So in that crystal place, in silent rows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor lovers lay at rest from joys and woes.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stranger from the mountains, breathless, traced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such thousands of shut eyes in order placed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such ranges of white feet, and patient lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All ruddy,⁠—for here death no blossom nips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He mark’d their brows and foreheads; saw their hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put sleekly on one side with nicest care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each one’s gentle wrists, with reverence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put cross-wise to its heart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“Let us commence,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whisper’d the guide, stuttering with joy, “even now.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spake, and, trembling like an aspen-bough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began to tear his scroll in pieces small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uttering the while some mumblings funeral.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tore it into pieces small as snow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That drifts unfeather’d when bleak northerns blow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And having done it, took his dark blue cloak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bound it round Endymion: then struck</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wand against the empty air times nine.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What more there is to do, young man, is thine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first a little patience; first undo</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This tangled thread, and wind it to a clue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, gentle! ’tis as weak as spider’s skein;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shouldst thou break it⁠—What, is it done so clean?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A power overshadows thee! Oh, brave!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spite of hell is tumbling to its grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here is a shell; ’tis pearly blank to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor mark’d with any sign or charactery⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Canst thou read aught? O read for pity’s sake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Olympus! we are safe! Now, Carian, break</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This wand against yon lyre on the pedestal.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">’Twas done: and straight with sudden swell and fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet music breathed her soul away, and sigh’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lullaby to silence.⁠—“Youth! now strew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These minced leaves on me, and passing through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those files of dead, scatter the same around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou wilt see the issue.”⁠—’Mid the sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flutes and viols, ravishing his heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion from Glaucus stood apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scatter’d in his face some fragments light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How lightning-swift the change! a youthful wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiling beneath a coral diadem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out-sparkling sudden like an upturn’d gem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appear’d, and, stepping to a beauteous corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kneel’d down beside it, and with tenderest force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press’d its cold hand, and wept,⁠—and Scylla sigh’d!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion, with quick hand, the charm applied⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nymph arose: he left them to their joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And onward went upon his high employ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showering those powerful fragments on the dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as he pass’d, each lifted up its head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As doth a flower at Apollo’s touch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death felt it to his inwards: ’twas too much:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death fell a-weeping in his charnel-house.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latmian persevered along, and thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All were reanimated. There arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A noise of harmony, pulses and throes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gladness in the air⁠—while many, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had died in mutual arms devout and true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprang to each other madly; and the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt a high certainty of being blest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They gazed upon Endymion. Enchantment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew drunken, and would have its head and bent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delicious symphonies, like airy flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Budded, and swell’d, and, full-blown, shed full showers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of light, soft, unseen leaves of sounds divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The two deliverers tasted a pure wine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of happiness, from fairy press oozed out.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speechless they eyed each other, and about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair assembly wandered to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distracted with the richest overflow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of joy that ever pour’d from heav’n.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">—“Away!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouted the new born god; “Follow, and pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our piety to Neptunus supreme!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Scylla, blushing sweetly from her dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They led on first, bent to her meek surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through portal columns of a giant size</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the vaulted, boundless emerald.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joyous all follow’d, as the leader call’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down marble steps; pouring as easily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hour-glass sand⁠—and fast, as you might see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swallows obeying the south summer’s call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or swans upon a gentle waterfall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thus went that beautiful multitude, nor far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere from among some rocks of glittering spar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just within ken, they saw descending thick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another multitude. Whereat more quick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moved either host. On a wide sand they met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of those numbers every eye was wet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For each their old love found. A murmuring rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like what was never heard in all the throes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wind and waters: ’tis past human wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell; ’tis dizziness to think of it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">This mighty consummation made, the host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moved on for many a league; and gain’d and lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Huge sea-marks; vanward swelling in array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the rear diminishing away,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till a faint dawn surprised them. Glaucus cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Behold! behold, the palace of his pride!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God Neptune’s palaces.” With noise increased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They shoulder’d on towards that brightening east.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At every onward step proud domes arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In prospect,⁠—diamond gleams and golden glows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of amber ’gainst their faces levelling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joyous, and many as the leaves in spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still onward; still the splendour gradual swell’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich opal domes were seen, on high upheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By jasper pillars, letting through their shafts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A blush of coral. Copious wonder-draughts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each gazer drank; and deeper drank more near:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what poor mortals fragment up, as mere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As marble was there lavish, to the vast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of one fair palace, that far, far surpass’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even for common bulk, those olden three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Memphis, and Babylon, and Nineveh.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As large, as bright, as colour’d as the bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Iris, when unfading it doth show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond a silvery shower, was the arch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which this Paphian army took its march,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the outer courts of Neptune’s state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence could be seen, direct, a golden gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which the leaders sped; but not half raught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere it burst open swift as fairy thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made those dazzled thousands veil their eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like callow eagles at the first sunrise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon with an eagle nativeness their gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ripe from hue-golden swoons took all the blaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, behold! large Neptune on his throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of emerald deep: yet not exalt alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At his right hand stood winged Love, and on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His left sat smiling Beauty’s paragon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Far as the mariner on highest mast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can see all round upon the calmed vast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wide was Neptune’s hall: and as the blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth vault the waters, so the waters drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their doming curtains, high, magnificent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awed from the throne aloof;⁠—and when storm rent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disclosed the thunder-gloomings in Jove’s air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soothed as now, flash’d sudden everywhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Noiseless, sub-marine cloudlets, glittering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death to a human eye: for there did spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From natural west, and east, and south, and north,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A light as of four sunsets, blazing forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gold-green zenith ’bove the Sea-God’s head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of lucid depth the floor, and far outspread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As breezeless lake, on which the slim canoe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of feather’d Indian darts about, as through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The delicatest air: air verily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for the portraiture of clouds and sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This palace floor breath-air,⁠—but for the amaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of deep-seen wonders motionless,⁠—and blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the dome pomp, reflected in extremes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Globing a golden sphere.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">They stood in dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Triton blew his horn. The palace rang;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Nereids danced; the Sirens faintly sang;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the great Sea-King bow’d his dripping head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Love took wing, and from his pinions shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On all the multitude a nectarous dew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ooze-born Goddess beckoned and drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair Scylla and her guides to conference;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when they reach’d the throned eminence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She kiss’d the sea-nymph’s cheek,⁠—who sat her down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A-toying with the doves. Then,⁠—“Mighty crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sceptre of this kingdom!” Venus said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thy vows were on a time to Nais paid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold!”⁠—Two copious tear-drops instant fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the God’s large eyes; he smiled delectable.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over Glaucus held his blessing hands.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Endymion! Ah! still wandering in the bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love? Now this is cruel. Since the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I met thee in earth’s bosom, all my power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have I put forth to serve thee. What, not yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Escaped from dull mortality’s harsh net?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little patience, youth! ’twill not be long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or I am skilless quite: an idle tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A humid eye, and steps luxurious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where these are new and strange, are ominous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, I have seen these signs in one of heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When others were all blind; and were I given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To utter secrets, haply I might say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some pleasant words:⁠—but Love will have his day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wait awhile expectant. Pr’ythee soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even in the passing of thine honey-moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Visit thou my Cytherea: thon wilt find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cupid well-natured, my Adonis kind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pray persuade with thee⁠—Ah, I have done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All blisses be upon thee, my sweet son!”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus the fair goddess: while Endymion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knelt to receive those accents halcyon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Meantime a glorious revelry began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the water-monarch. Nectar ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In courteous fountains to all cups out-reach’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plunder’d vines, teeming exhaustless, pleach’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New growth about each shell and pendent lyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which, in disentangling for their fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pull’d down fresh foliage and coverture</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For dainty toying. Cupid, empire-sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flutter’d and laugh’d, and oft-times through the throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made a delighted way. Then dance, and song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And garlanding, grew wild; and pleasure reign’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In harmless tendril they each other chain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strove who should be smother’d deepest in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh crush of leaves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">O ’tis a very sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one so weak to venture his poor verse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such a place as this. O do not curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High Muses! let him hurry to the ending.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">All suddenly were silent. A soft blending</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dulcet instruments came charmingly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then a hymn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“King of the stormy sea!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brother of Jove, and co-inheritor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of elements! Eternally before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee the waves awful bow. Fast, stubborn rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At thy fear’d trident shrinking, doth unlock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its deep foundations, hissing into foam.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All mountain-rivers, lost in the wide home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy capacious bosom, ever flow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou frownest, and old Æolus thy foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Skulks to his cavern, ’mid the gruff complaint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all his rebel tempests. Dark clouds faint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, from thy diadem, a silver gleam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slants over blue dominion. Thy bright team</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gulfs in the morning light, and scuds along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bring thee nearer to that golden song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo singeth, while his chariot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waits at the doors of heaven. Thou art not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For scenes like this: an empire stern hast thou;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it hath furrow’d that large front: yet now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As newly come of heaven, dost thou sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To blend and interknit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Subdued majesty with this glad time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O shell-borne King sublime!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We lay our hearts before thee evermore⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We sing, and we adore!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Breathe softly, flutes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be tender of your strings, ye soothing lutes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor be the trumpet heard! O vain, O vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not flowers budding in an April rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor breath of sleeping dove, nor river’s flow,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, nor the Æolian twang of Love’s own bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can mingle music fit for the soft ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of goddess Cytherea!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet deign, white Queen of Beauty, thy fair eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On our soul’s sacrifice.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Bright-winged Child!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who has another care when thou hast smiled?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unfortunates on earth, we see at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All death-shadows, and glooms that overcast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our spirits, fann’d away by thy light pinions.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O sweetest essence! sweetest of all minions!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God of warm pulses, and dishevell’d hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And panting bosoms bare!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear unseen light in darkness! eclipser</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of light in light! delicious poisoner!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy venom’d goblet will we quaff until</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We fill⁠—we fill!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by thy Mother’s lips⁠—”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Was heard no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For clamour, when the golden palace door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open’d again, and from without, in shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A new magnificence. On oozy throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smooth-moving came Oceanus the old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take a latest glimpse at his sheepfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before he went into his quiet cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To muse for ever⁠—Then a lucid wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scoop’d from its trembling sisters of mid-sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afloat, and pillowing up the majesty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Doris, and the Ægean seer, her spouse⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next, on a dolphin, clad in laurel boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Theban Amphion leaning on his lute:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fingers went across it⁠—All were mute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gaze on Amphitrite, queen of pearls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Thetis pearly too.⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">The palace whirls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around giddy Endymion; seeing he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was there far strayed from mortality.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could not bear it⁠—shut his eyes in vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imagination gave a dizzier pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O I shall die! sweet Venus, be my stay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is my lovely mistress? Wellaway!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I die⁠—I hear her voice⁠—I feel my wing”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Neptune’s feet he sank. A sudden ring’⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Nereids were about him, in kind strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To usher back his spirit into life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still he slept. At last they interwove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their cradling arms, and purposed to convey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards a crystal bower far away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Lo! while slow carried through the pitying crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his inward senses these words spake aloud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Written in starlight on the dark above:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i>Dearest Endymion! my entire love!</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>How have I dwelt in fear of fate; ’tis done⁠—</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Immortal bliss for me too hast thou won.</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Arise then! for the hen-dove shall not hatch</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Her ready eggs, before I’ll kissing snatch</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Thee into endless heaven. Awake! awake!</i>”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The youth at once arose: a placid lake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came quiet to his eyes; and forest green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cooler than all the wonders he had seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lull’d with its simple song his fluttering breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How happy once again in grassy nest!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="endymion-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Muse of my native land! loftiest Muse!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O first-born on the mountains! by the hues</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven on the spiritual air begot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long didst thou sit alone in northern grot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While yet our England was a wolfish den;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before our forests heard the talk of men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the first of Druids was a child:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long didst thou sit amid our regions wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rapt in a deep prophetic solitude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came an eastern voice of solemn mood:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet wast thou patient. Then sang forth the Nine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo’s garland:⁠—yet didst thou divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such home-bred glory, that they cried in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Come hither, Sister of the Island!” Plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spake fair Ausonia; and once more she spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A higher summons:⁠—still didst thou betake</span>
					<span>Thee to thy native hopes. O thou hast won</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A full accomplishment! The thing is done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which undone, these our latter days had risen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On barren souls. Great Muse, thou know’st what prison</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flesh and bone, curbs, and confines, and frets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our spirits’ wings: despondency besets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our pillows; and the fresh to-morrow morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seems to give forth its light in very scorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of our dull, uninspired, snail-paced lives.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long have I said, how happy he who shrives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee! But then I thought on poets gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And could not pray:⁠—nor can I now⁠—so on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I move to the end in lowliness of heart.⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ah, woe is me! that I should fondly part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From my dear native land! Ah, foolish maid!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glad was the hour, when, with thee, myriads bade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu to Ganges and their pleasant fields!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To one so friendless the clear freshet yields</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bitter coolness; the ripe grape is sour:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I would have, great gods! but one short hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of native air⁠—let me but die at home.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Endymion to heaven’s airy dome</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was offering up a hecatomb of vows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When these words reach’d him. Whereupon he bows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head through thorny-green entanglement</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of underwood, and to the sound is bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anxious as hind towards her hidden fawn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Is no one near to help me? No fair dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life from charitable voice? No sweet saying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To set my dull and sadden’d spirit playing?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No hand to toy with mine? No lips so sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may worship them? No eyelids meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To twinkle on my bosom? No one dies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before me, till from these enslaving eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Redemption sparkles!⁠—I am sad and lost.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thou, Carian lord, hadst better have been tost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a whirlpool. Vanish into air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm mountaineer! for canst thou only bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woman’s sigh alone and in distress?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See not her charms! Is Phœbe passionless?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phœbe is fairer far⁠—O gaze no more:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet if thou wilt behold all beauty’s store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold her panting in the forest grass!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do not those curls of glossy jet surpass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For tenderness the arms so idly lain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongst them? Feelest not a kindred pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see such lovely eyes in swimming search</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After some warm delight, that seems to perch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dovelike in the dim cell lying beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their upper lids?⁠—Hist!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“O for Hermes’ wand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To touch this flower into human shape!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That woodland Hyacinthus could escape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his green prison, and here kneeling down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call me his queen, his second life’s fair crown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah me, how I could love!⁠—My soul doth melt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the unhappy youth⁠—Love! I have felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So faint a kindness, such a meek surrender</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what my own full thoughts had made too tender,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That but for tears my life had fled away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye deaf and senseless minutes of the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, old forest, hold ye this for true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no lightning, no authentic dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the eye of love: there’s not a sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melodious howsoever, can confound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heavens and earth in one to such a death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As doth the voice of love: there’s not a breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will mingle kindly with the meadow air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it has panted round, and stolen a share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of passion from the heart!”⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Upon a bough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leant, wretched. He surely cannot now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thirst for another love: O impious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he can even dream upon it thus!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought he, “Why am I not as are the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since to a woe like this I have been led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the dark earth, and through the wondrous sea?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goddess! I love thee not the less: from thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Juno’s smile I turn not⁠—no, no, no⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the great waters are at ebb and flow.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have a triple soul! O fond pretence⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For both, for both my love is so immense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I feel my heart is cut for them in twain.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And so he groan’d, as one by beauty slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lady’s heart beat quick, and he could see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her gentle bosom heave tumultuously.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sprang from his green covert: there she lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet as a musk-rose upon new-made hay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all her limbs on tremble, and her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shut softly up alive. To speak he tries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Fair damsel, pity me! forgive that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus violate thy bower’s sanctity!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O pardon me, for I am full of grief⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grief born of thee, young angel! fairest thief!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who stolen hast away the wings wherewith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was to top the heavens. Dear maid, sith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art my executioner, and I feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loving and hatred, misery and weal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will in a few short hours be nothing to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all my story that much passion slew me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do smile upon the evening of my days;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for my tortured brain begins to craze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be thou my nurse; and let me understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How dying I shall kiss that lily hand.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost weep for me? Then should I be content.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scowl on, ye fates! until the firmament</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outblackens Erebus, and the full-cavern’d earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crumbles into itself. By the cloud-girth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Jove, those tears have given me a thirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet oblivion.”⁠—As her heart would burst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The maiden sobb’d awhile, and then replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why must such desolation betide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As that thou speakest of? Are not these green nooks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empty of all misfortune? Do the brooks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Utter a gorgon voice? Does yonder thrush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Schooling its half-fledged little ones to brush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the dewy forest, whisper tales?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speak not of grief, young stranger, or cold snails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will slime the rose to-night. Though if thou wilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methinks ’twould be a guilt⁠—a very guilt⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to companion thee, and sigh away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The light⁠—the dusk⁠—the dark⁠—till break of day!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Dear lady,” said Endymion, “ ’tis past:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love thee! and my days can never last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may pass in patience still speak:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me have music dying, and I seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more delight⁠—I bid adieu to all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Didst thou not after other climates call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And murmur about Indian streams?”⁠—Then she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sitting beneath the midmost forest tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For pity sang this roundelay⁠⸺⁠</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">“O Sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why dost borrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The natural hue of health, from vermeil lips?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To give maiden blushes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To the white rose bushes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or is’t thy dewy hand the daisy tips?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">“O Sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why dost borrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lustrous passion from a falcon-eye?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To give the glowworm light?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or, on a moonless night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tinge, on siren shores, the salt sea-spry?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">“O Sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why dost borrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mellow ditties from a mourning tongue?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To give at evening pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Unto the nightingale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou mayst listen the cold dews among?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">“O Sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why dost borrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heart’s lightness from the merriment of May?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A lover would not tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A cowslip on the head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he should dance from eve till peep of day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor any drooping flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Held sacred for thy bower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherever he may sport himself and play.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">“To Sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I bade good morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thought to leave her far away behind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But cheerly, cheerly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She loves me dearly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She is so constant to me, and so kind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I would deceive her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And so leave her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ah! she is so constant and so kind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Beneath my palm-trees, by the river side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sat a-weeping: in the whole world wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no one to ask me why I wept,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And so I kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brimming the water-lily cups with tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cold as my fears.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Beneath my palm-trees, by the river side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sat a-weeping: what enamour’d bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cheated by shadowy wooer from the clouds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But hides and shrouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath dark palm-trees by a river side?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And as I sat, over the light blue hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came a noise of revellers: the rills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the wide stream came of purple hue⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’Twas Bacchus and his crew!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earnest trumpet spake, and silver thrills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From kissing cymbals made a merry din⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’Twas Bacchus and his kin!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Like to a moving vintage down they came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crown’d with green leaves, and faces all on flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All madly dancing through the pleasant valley,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To scare thee, Melancholy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O then, O then, thou wast a simple name!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I forgot thee, as the berried holly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By shepherds is forgotten, when, in June,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tall chestnuts keep away the sun and moon:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I rush’d into the folly!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Within his car, aloft, young Bacchus stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trifling his ivy-dart, in dancing mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With sidelong laughing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And little rills of crimson wine imbrued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His plump white arms, and shoulders, enough white</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For Venus’ pearly bite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And near him rode Silenus on his ass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pelted with flowers as he on did pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Tipsily quaffing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whence came ye, merry Damsels! whence came ye!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many, and so many, and such glee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why have ye left your bowers desolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Your lutes, and gentler fate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘We follow Bacchus! Bacchus on the wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A conquering!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bacchus, young Bacchus! good or ill betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We dance before him thorough kingdoms wide:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come hither, lady fair, and joined be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To our wild minstrelsy!’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whence came ye, jolly Satyrs! whence came ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many, and so many, and such glee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why have ye left your forest haunts, why left</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Your nuts in oak-tree cleft?⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‘For wine, for wine we left our kernel tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For wine we left our heath, and yellow brooms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And cold mushrooms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For wine we follow Bacchus through the earth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great god of breathless cups and chirping mirth!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come hither, lady fair, and joined be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To our mad minstrelsy!’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Over wide streams and mountains great we went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, save when Bacchus kept his ivy tent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward the tiger and the leopard pants,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With Asian elephants:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward these myriads⁠—with song and dance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With zebras striped, and sleek Arabians’ prance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Web-footed alligators, crocodiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing upon their scaly backs, in files,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plump infant laughers mimicking the coil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of seamen, and stout galley-rowers’ toil:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With toying oars and silken sails they glide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor care for wind and tide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Mounted on panthers’ furs and lions’ manes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From rear to van they scour about the plains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A three days’ journey in a moment done;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And always, at the rising of the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the wilds they hunt with spear and horn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">On spleenful unicorn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I saw Osirian Egypt kneel adown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Before the vine-wreath crown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw parch’d Abyssinia rouse and sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To the silver cymbals’ ring!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw the whelming vintage hotly pierce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Old Tartary the fierce!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Kings of Inde their jewel-sceptres vail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from their treasures scatter pearled hail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great Brahma from his mystic heaven groans,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And all his priesthood moans;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before young Bacchus’ eye-wink turning pale,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into these regions came I following him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sick-hearted, weary⁠—so I took a whim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stray away into these forests drear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Alone, without a peer:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I have told thee all thou mayest hear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">“Young Stranger!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I’ve been a ranger</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In search of pleasure throughout every clime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Alas, ’tis not for me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Bewitch’d I sure must be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lose in grieving all my maiden prime.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">“Come then, Sorrow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sweetest Sorrow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like an own babe I nurse thee on my breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I thought to leave thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And deceive thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now of all the world I love thee best.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">“There is not one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">No, no, not one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thee to comfort a poor lonely maid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou art her mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And her brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her playmate, and her wooer in the shade.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O what a sigh she gave in finishing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And look, quite dead to every wordly thing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion could not speak, but gazed on her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And listened to the wind that now did stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the crisped oaks full drearily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet with as sweet a softness as might be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remember’d from its velvet summer song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last he said: “Poor lady, how thus long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have I been able to endure that voice?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair Melody! kind Siren! I’ve no choice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must be thy sad servant evermore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot choose but kneel here and adore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas, I must not think⁠—by Phœbe, no!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me not think, soft Angel! shall it be so?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, beautifullest, shall I never think?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou couldst foster me beyond the brink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of recollection! make my watchful care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close up its bloodshot eyes, nor see despair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do gently murder half my soul, and I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall feel the other half so utterly!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m giddy at that cheek so fair and smooth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let it blush so ever! let it soothe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My madness! let it mantle rosy-warm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the tinge of love, panting in safe alarm.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This cannot be thy hand, and yet it is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this is sure thine other softling⁠—this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine own fair bosom, and I am so near!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt fall asleep! O let me sip that tear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whisper one sweet word that I may know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is this world⁠—sweet dewy blossom!”⁠—<em>Woe!</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Woe! woe to that Endymion! Where is he?⁠—</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even these words went echoing dismally</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the wide forest⁠—a most fearful tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one repenting in his latest moan;</span>
					<span>And while it died away a shade pass’d by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of a thundercloud. When arrows fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the thick branches, poor ringdoves sleek forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their timid necks and tremble; so these both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leant to each other trembling, and sat so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waiting for some destruction⁠—when lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foot-feather’d Mercury appear’d sublime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the tall tree tops; and in less time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than shoots the slanted hail-storm, down he dropt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards the ground; but rested not, nor stopt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One moment from his home: only the sward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with his wand light touch’d, and heavenward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swifter than sight was gone⁠—even before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The teeming earth a sudden witness bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his swift magic. Diving swans appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the crystal circlings white and clear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And catch the cheated eye in wild surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How they can dive in sight and unseen rise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from the turf outsprang two steeds jet-black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each with large dark blue wings upon his back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youth of Caria placed the lovely dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On one, and felt himself in spleen to tame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other’s fierceness. Through the air they flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High as the eagles. Like two drops of dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exhaled to Phœbus’ lips, away they are gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the earth away⁠—unseen, alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among cool clouds and winds, but that the free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The buoyant life of song can floating be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above their heads, and follow them untired.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Muse of my native land, am I inspired?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is the giddy air, and I must spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide pinions to keep here; nor do I dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or height, or depth, or width, or any chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Precipitous: I have beneath my glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those towering horses and their mournful freight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could I thus sail, and see, and thus await</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fearless for power of thought, without thine aid?⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">There is a sleepy dusk, an odorous shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From some approaching wonder, and behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those winged steeds, with snorting nostrils bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snuff at its faint extreme, and seem to tire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dying to embers from their native fire!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">There curl’d a purple mist around them; soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seem’d as when around the pale new moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad Zephyr droops the clouds like weeping willow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas Sleep slow journeying with head on pillow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the first time, since he came nigh dead-born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the old womb of night, his cave forlorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had he left more forlorn; for the first time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He felt aloof the day and morning’s prime⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because into his depth Cimmerian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came a dream, showing how a young man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere a lean bat could plump its wintery skin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would at high Jove’s empyreal footstool win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An immortality, and how espouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jove’s daughter, and be reckon’d of his house.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now was he slumbering towards heaven’s gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he might at the threshold one hour wait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear the marriage melodies, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sink downward to his dusky cave again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His litter of smooth semilucent mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diversely tinged with rose and amethyst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Puzzled those eyes that for the centre sought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scarcely for one moment could be caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sluggish form reposing motionless.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those two on winged steeds, with all the stress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of vision search’d for him, as one would look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Athwart the sallows of a river nook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To catch a glance at silver-throated eels,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or from old Skiddaw’s top, when fog conceals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His rugged forehead in a mantle pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an eye-guess towards some pleasant vale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descry a favourite hamlet faint and far.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">These raven horses, though they foster’d are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of earth’s splenetic fire, dully drop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their full-vein’d ears, nostrils blood wide, and stop;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the spiritless mist have they outspread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ample feathers, are in slumber dead,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on those pinions, level in mid air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion sleepeth and the lady fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slowly they sail, slowly as icy isle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a calm sea drifting: and meanwhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mournful wanderer dreams. Behold! he walks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On heaven’s pavement; brotherly he talks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To divine powers: from his hand full fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juno’s proud birds are pecking pearly grain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tries the nerve of Phœbus’ golden bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asketh where the golden apples grow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his arm he braces Pallas’ shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strives in vain to unsettle and to wield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Jovian thunderbolt: arch Hebe brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A full-brimm’d goblet, dances lightly, sings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tantalizes long; at last he drinks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lost in pleasure, at her feet he sinks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touching with dazzled lips her starlight hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He blows a bugle,⁠—an ethereal band</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are visible above: the Seasons four,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Green-kirtled Spring, flush Summer, golden store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Autumn’s sickle, Winter frosty hoar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Join dance with shadowy Hours; while still the blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In swells unmitigated, still doth last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sway their floating morris. “Whose is this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose bugle?” he inquires: they smile⁠—“O Dis!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why is this mortal here? Dost thou not know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its mistress’ lips? Not thou?⁠—’Tis Dian’s: lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She rises crescented!” He looks, ’tis she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His very goddess: good-bye earth, and sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And air, and pains, and care, and suffering;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good-bye to all but love! Then doth he spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards her, and awakes⁠—and, strange, o’erhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those same fragrant exhalations bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beheld awake his very dream: the gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood smiling; merry Hebe laughs and nods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Phœbe bends towards him crescented.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O state perplexing! On the pinion bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too well awake, he feels the panting side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his delicious lady. He who died</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For soaring too audacious in the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that same treacherous wax began to run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt not more tongue-tied than Endymion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His heart leapt up as to its rightful throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that fair-shadow’d passion pulsed its way⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, what perplexity! Ah, well a day!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fond, so beauteous was his bed-fellow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could not help but kiss her: then he grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awhile forgetful of all beauty save</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young Phœbe’s, golden-hair’d; and so ’gan crave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgiveness: yet he turn’d once more to look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the sweet sleeper,⁠—all his soul was shook,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She press’d his hand in slumber; so once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could not help but kiss her and adore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this the shadow wept, melting away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latmian started up: “Bright goddess, stay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Search my most hidden breast! By truth’s own tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have no dædale heart; why is it wrung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To desperation? Is there nought for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the bourne of bliss, but misery?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">These words awoke the stranger of dark tresses:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dawning love-look rapt Endymion blesses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ’haviour soft. Sleep yawn’d from underneath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou swan of Ganges, let us no more breathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This murky phantasm! thou contented seem’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pillow’d in lovely idleness, nor dream’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What horrors may discomfort thee and me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, shouldst thou die from my heart-treachery!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet did she merely weep⁠—her gentle soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath no revenge in it: as it is whole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tenderness, would I were whole in love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can I prize thee, fair maid, all price above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even when I feel as true as innocence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do, I do.⁠—What is this soul then? Whence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came it? It does not seem my own, and I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have no self-passion or identity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some fearful end must be: where, where is it?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Nemesis, I see my spirit flit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone about the dark⁠—Forgive me, sweet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall we away?” He roused the steeds; they beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their wings chivalrous into the clear air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving old Sleep within his vapoury lair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The good-night blush of eve was waning slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Vesper, risen star, began to throe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the dusk heavens silvery, when they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus sprang direct towards the Galaxy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did speed hinder converse soft and strange⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternal oaths and vows they interchange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such wise, in such temper, so aloof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up in the winds, beneath a starry roof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So witless of their doom, that verily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis well nigh past man’s search their hearts to see⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether they wept, or laugh’d or grieved or toy’d⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most like with joy gone mad, with sorrow cloy’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Full facing their swift flight, from ebon streak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon put forth a little diamond peak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No bigger than an unobserved star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On tiny point of fairy scimetar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright signal that she only stoop’d to tie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her silver sandals, ere deliciously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She bow’d into the heavens her timid head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slowly she rose, as though she would have fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While to his lady meek the Carian turn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mark if her dark eyes had yet discern’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This beauty in its birth⁠—Despair! despair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw her body fading gaunt and spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the cold moonshine. Straight he seized her wrist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It melted from his grasp; her hand he kiss’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, horror! kiss’d his own⁠—he was alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her steed a little higher soar’d and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dropt hawk-wise to the earth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">There lies a den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the seeming confines of the space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made for the soul to wander in and trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its own existence, of remotest glooms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark regions are around it, where the tombs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of buried griefs the spirit sees, but scarce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One hour doth linger weeping, for the pierce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of new-born woe it feels more inly smart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in these regions many a venom’d dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At random flies; they are the proper home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every ill: the man is yet to come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hath not journey’d in this native hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But few have ever felt how calm and well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleep may be had in that deep den of all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There anguish does not sting, nor pleasure pall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woe-hurricanes beat ever at the gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet all is still within and desolate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beset with painful gusts, within ye hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sound so loud as when on curtain’d bier</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The death-watch tick is stifled. Enter none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who strive therefor: on the sudden it is won.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just when the sufferer begins to burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then it is free to him; and from an urn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still fed by melting ice, he takes a draught⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young Semele such richness never quaff’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her maternal longing. Happy gloom!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark Paradise! where pale becomes the bloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of health by due; where silence dreariest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is most articulate; where hopes infest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where those eyes are the brightest far that keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their lids shut longest in a dreamless sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O happy spirit-home! O wondrous soul!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pregnant with such a den to save the whole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thine own depth. Hail, gentle Carian!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, never since thy griefs and woes began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou felt so content: a grievous feud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath led thee to this Cave of Quietude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, his lull’d soul was there, although upborne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dangerous speed: and so he did not mourn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he knew not whither he was going.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So happy was he, not the aerial blowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of trumpets at clear parley from the east</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could rouse from that fine relish, that high feast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stung the feather’d horse; with fierce alarm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He flapp’d towards the sound. Alas, no charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could lift Endymion’s head, or he had view’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A skyey mask, a pinion’d multitude,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And silvery was its passing: voices sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warbling the while as if to lull and greet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wanderer in his path. Thus warbled they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While past the vision went in bright array.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Who, who from Dian’s feast would be away?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the golden bowers of the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are empty left? Who, who away would be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Cynthia’s wedding and festivity?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not Hesperus: lo! upon his silver wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leans away for highest heaven and sings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snapping his lucid fingers merrily!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, Zephyrus! art here, and Flora too!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye tender bibbers of the rain and dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young playmates of the rose and daffodil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be careful, ere ye enter in, to fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Your baskets high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fennel green, and balm, and golden pines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Savory, latter-mint, and columbines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cool parsley, basil sweet, and sunny thyme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, every flower and leaf of every clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All gather’d in the dewy morning: hie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Away! fly, fly!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crystalline brother of the belt of heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aquarius! to whom king Jove has given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two liquid pulse streams ’stead of feather’d wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two fanlike fountains⁠—thine illuminings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">For Dian play:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dissolve the frozen purity of air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let thy white shoulders silvery and bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show cold through watery pinions; make more bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Star-Queen’s crescent on her marriage night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Haste, haste away!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Castor has tamed the planet Lion, see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the Bear has Pollux mastery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A third is in the race! who is the third,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speeding away swift as the eagle bird?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">The ramping Centaur!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Lion’s mane’s on end: the Bear how fierce!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Centaur’s arrow ready seems to pierce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some enemy: far forth his bow is bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the blue of heaven. He’ll be shent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Pale unrelentor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he shall hear the wedding lutes a-playing.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Andromeda! sweet woman! why delaying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So timidly among the stars: come hither!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Join this bright throng, and nimbly follow whither</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">They all are going.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Danae’s Son, before Jove newly bow’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has wept for thee, calling to Jove aloud.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, gentle lady, did he disenthrall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye shall for ever live and love, for all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Thy tears are flowing.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Daphne’s fright, behold Apollo!”⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">More</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion heard not: down his steed him bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prone to the green head of a misty hill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">His first touch of the earth went nigh to kill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas!” said he, “were I but always borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through dangerous winds, had but my footsteps worn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A path in hell, for ever would I bless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Horrors which nourish an uneasiness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my own sullen conquering: to him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lives beyond earth’s boundary, grief is dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sorrow is but a shadow: now I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grass; I feel the solid ground⁠—Ah, me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is thy voice⁠—divinest! Where?⁠—who? who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left thee so quiet on this bed of dew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold upon this happy earth we are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us ay love each other; let us fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On forest-fruits, and never, never go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the abodes of mortals here below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or be by phantoms duped. O destiny!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a labyrinth now my soul would fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with thy beauty will I deaden it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where didst thou melt to? By thee will I sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ever: let our fate stop here⁠—a kid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I on this spot will offer: Pan will bid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us live in peace, in love and peace among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His forest wildernesses. I have clung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To nothing, loved a nothing, nothing seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or felt but a great dream! Oh, I have been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presumptuous against love, against the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against all elements, against the tie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mortals each to each, against the blooms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flowers, rush of rivers, and the tombs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heroes gone! Against his proper glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has my own soul conspired: so my story</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will I to children utter, and repent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There never lived a mortal man, who bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His appetite beyond his natural sphere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But starved and died. My sweetest Indian, here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here will I kneel, for thou redeemed hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My life from too thin breathing: gone and past</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are cloudy phantasms. Caverns lone, farewell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And air of visions, and the monstrous swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of visionary seas! No, never more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall airy voices cheat me to the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of tangled wonder, breathless and aghast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu, my daintiest Dream! although so vast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My love is still for thee. The hour may come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we shall meet in pure elysium.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On earth I may not love thee; and therefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doves will I offer up, and sweetest store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All through the teeming year: so thou wilt shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On me, and on this damsel fair of mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bless our simple lives. My Indian bliss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My river-lily bud! one human kiss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One sigh of real breath⁠—one gentle squeeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm as a dove’s nest among summer trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And warm with dew at ooze from living blood!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither didst melt? Ah, what of that!⁠—all good</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’ll talk about⁠—no more of dreaming.⁠—Now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where shall our dwelling be? Under the brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some steep mossy hill, where ivy dun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would hide us up, although spring leaves were none;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where dark yew trees, as we rustle through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will drop their scarlet berry cups of dew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou wouldst joy to live in such a place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dusk for our loves, yet light enough to grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those gentle limbs on mossy bed reclined:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by one step the blue sky shouldst thou find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by another, in deep dell below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See, through the trees, a little river go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in its mid-day gold and glimmering.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honey from out the gnarled hive I’ll bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And apples, wan with sweetness, gather thee,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cresses that grow where no man may them see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sorrel untorn by the dew-claw’d stag:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pipes will I fashion of the syrinx flag,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou mayst always know whither I roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it shall please thee in our quiet home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To listen and think of love. Still let me speak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still let me dive into the joy I seek,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For yet the past doth prison me. The rill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou haply mayst delight in, will I fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fairy fishes from the mountain tarn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt feed them from the squirrel’s barn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its bottom will I strew with amber shells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pebbles blue from deep enchanted wells.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its sides I’ll plant with dew-sweet eglantine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And honeysuckles full of clear bee-wine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will entice this crystal rill to trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s silver name upon the meadow’s face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll kneel to Vesta, for a flame of fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to god Phœbus, for a golden lyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Empress Dian, for a hunting-spear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Vesper, for a taper silver-clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may see thy beauty through the night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Flora, and a nightingale shall light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tame on thy finger; to the River-gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they shall bring thee taper fishing-rods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gold, and lines of Naiads’ long bright tress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven shield thee for thine utter loveliness!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy mossy footstool shall the altar be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Fore which I’ll bend, bending, dear love, to thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those lips shall be my Delphos, and shall speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laws to my footsteps, colour to my cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembling or steadfastness to this same voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of three sweetest pleasurings the choice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that affectionate light, those diamond things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those eyes, those passions, those supreme pearl springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be my grief, or twinkle me to pleasure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, is not bliss within our perfect seizure?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O that I could not doubt!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">The mountaineer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus strove by fancies vain and crude to clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His brier’d path to some tranquillity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It gave bright gladness to his lady’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet the tears she wept were tears of sorrow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answering thus, just as the golden morrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beam’d upward from the valleys of the east:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O that the flutter of his heart had ceased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the sweet name of love had pass’d away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young feather’d tyrant! by a swift decay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt thou devote this body to the earth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I do think that at my very birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lisp’d thy blooming titles inwardly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For at the first, first dawn and thought of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With uplift hands I blest the stars of heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou not cruel? Ever have I striven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think thee kind, but ah, it will not do!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When yet a child, I heard that kisses drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Favour from thee, and so I gave and gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the void air, bidding them find out love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when I came to feel how far above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All fancy, pride, and fickle maidenhood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All earthly pleasure, all imagined good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was the warm tremble of a devout kiss,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even then, that moment, at the thought of this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fainting I fell into a bed of flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And languish’d there three days. Ye milder powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am I not cruelly wrong’d? Believe, believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me, dear Endymion, were I to weave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With my own fancies garlands of sweet life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shouldst be one of all. Ah, bitter strife!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may not be thy love: I am forbidden⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indeed I am⁠—thwarted, affrighted, chidden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By things I tremble at, and gorgon wrath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twice hast thou ask’d whither I went: henceforth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ask me no more! I may not utter it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor may I be thy love. We might commit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ourselves at once to vengeance; we might die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We might embrace and die: voluptuous thought!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enlarge not to my hunger, or I’m caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In trammels of perverse deliciousness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, no, that shall not be: thee will I bless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bid a long adieu.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">The Carian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No word return’d: both lovelorn, silent, wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the valleys green together went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far wandering, they were perforce content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sit beneath a fair lone beechen tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor at each other gazed, but heavily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pored on its hazel cirque of shedded leaves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Endymion! unhappy! it nigh grieves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me to behold thee thus in last extreme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enskied ere this, but truly that I deem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truth the best music in a first-born song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy lute-voiced brother will I sing ere long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt aid⁠—hast thou not aided me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, moonlight Emperor! felicity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has been thy meed for many thousand years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet often have I, on the brink of tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mourn’d as if yet thou wert a forester;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetting the old tale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">He did not stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes from the dead leaves, or one small pulse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of joy he might have felt. The spirit culls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unfaded amaranth, when wild it strays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the old garden-ground of boyish days.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little onward ran the very stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which he took his first soft poppy dream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the very bark ’gainst which he leant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A crescent he had carved, and round it spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His skill in little stars. The teeming tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had swollen and green’d the pious charactery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not ta’en out. Why, there was not a slope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up which he had not fear’d the antelope;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a tree, beneath whose rooty shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had not with his tamed leopards play’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor could an arrow light, or javelin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fly in the air where his had never been⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet he knew it not.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">O treachery!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why does his lady smile, pleasing her eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all his sorrowing? He sees her not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But who so stares on him? His sister sure!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona of the woods!⁠—Can she endure⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impossible⁠—how dearly they embrace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His lady smiles; delight is in her face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is no treachery.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">“Dear brother mine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion, weep not so! Why shouldst thou pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all great Latmos so exalt will be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thank the great gods, and look not bitterly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And speak not one pale word, and sigh no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sure I will not believe thou hast such store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of grief, to last thee to my kiss again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou surely canst not bear a mind in pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come hand in hand with one so beautiful.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be happy both of you! for I will pull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flowers of autumn for your coronals.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pan’s holy priest for young Endymion calls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he is restored, thou, fairest dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shalt be our queen. Now, is it not a shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see ye thus,⁠—not very, very sad?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps ye are too happy to be glad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O feel as if it were a common day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free-voiced as one who never was away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No tongue shall ask, Whence come ye? but ye shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be gods of your own rest imperial.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not even I, for one whole month, will pry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the hours that have pass’d us by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since in my arbour I did sing to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Hermes! on this very night will be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hymning up to Cynthia, queen of light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the soothsayers old saw yesternight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good visions in the air,⁠—whence will befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As say these sages, health perpetual</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shepherds and their flocks; and furthermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Dian’s face they read the gentle lore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore for her these vesper-carols are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our friends will all be there from nigh and far.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many upon thy death have ditties made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many, even now, their foreheads shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cypress, on a day of sacrifice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New singing for our maids shalt thou devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pluck the sorrow from our huntsmen’s brows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me, my lady-queen, how to espouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This wayward brother to his rightful joys!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes are on thee bent, as thou didst poise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fate most goddess-like. Help me, I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lure⁠—Endymion, dear brother, say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What ails thee?” He could bear no more, and so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bent his soul fiercely like a spiritual bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twang’d it inwardly, and calmly said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I would have thee my only friend, sweet maid!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My only visitor! not ignorant though,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That those deceptions which for pleasure go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mong men, are pleasures real as real may be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there are higher ones I may not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If impiously an earthly realm I take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since I saw thee, I have been wide awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Night after night, and day by day, until</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the empyrean I have drunk my fill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let it content thee. Sister, seeing me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More happy than betides mortality.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hermit young, I’ll live in mossy cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where thou alone shalt come to me, and lave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy spirit in the wonders I shall tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through me the shepherd realm shall prosper well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to thy tongue will I all health confide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for my sake, let this young maid abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thee as a dear sister. Thou alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona, mayst return to me. I own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This may sound strangely: but when, dearest girl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou seest it for my happiness, no pearl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will trespass down those cheeks. Companion fair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt be content to dwell with her, to share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This sister’s love with me?” Like one resign’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bent by circumstance, and thereby blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In self-commitment, thus that meek unknown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Aye, but a buzzing by my ears has flown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of jubilee to Dian:⁠—truth I heard!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well then, I see there is no little bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tender soever, but is Jove’s own care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long have I sought for rest, and, unaware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold I find it! so exalted too!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So after my own heart! I knew, I knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a place untenanted in it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that same void white Chastity shall sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And monitor me nightly to lone slumber.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sanest lips I vow me to the number</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Dian’s sisterhood; and, kind lady,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thy good help, this very night shall see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My future days to her fane consecrate.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As feels a dreamer what doth most create</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His own particular fright, so these three felt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like one who, in after ages, knelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Lucifer or Baal, when he’d pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After a little sleep: or when in mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far under-ground, a sleeper meets his friends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who know him not. Each diligently bends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards common thoughts and things for very fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Striving their ghastly malady to cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thinking it a thing of yes and no,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That housewives talk of. But the spirit-blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was struck, and all were dreamers. At the last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion said: “Are not our fates all cast?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why stand we here? Adieu, ye tender pair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu!” Whereat those maidens, with wild stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walk’d dizzily away. Pained and hot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes went after them, until they got</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near to a cypress grove, whose deadly maw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one swift moment, would what then he saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Engulf for ever. “Stay,” he cried, “ah, stay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn, damsels! hist! one word I have to say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet Indian, I would see thee once again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is a thing I dote on: so I’d fain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona, ye should hand in hand repair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into those holy groves that silent are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind great Dian’s temple. I’ll be yon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Vesper’s earliest twinkle⁠—they are gone⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But once, once, once again⁠—” At this he press’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hands against his face, and then did rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head upon a mossy hillock green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so remain’d as he a corpse had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the long day; save when he scantly lifted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes abroad, to see how shadows shifted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the slow move of time,⁠—sluggish and weary</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the poplar tops, in journey dreary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had reach’d the river’s brim. Then up he rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, slowly as that very river flows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walk’d towards the temple grove with this lament:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why such a golden eve? The breeze is sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Careful and soft, that not a leaf may fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the serene father of them all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bows down his summer head below the west.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now am I of breath, speech, and speed possest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at the setting I must bid adieu</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her for the last time. Night will strew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the damp grass myriads of lingering leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with them shall I die; nor much it grieves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To die, when summer dies on the cold sward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, I have been a butterfly, a lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flowers, garlands, love-knots, silly posies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groves, meadows, melodies, and arbour-roses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My kingdom’s at its death, and just it is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I should die with it: so in all this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We miscall grief, bale, sorrow, heart-break, woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is there to plain of? By Titan’s foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am but rightly served.” So saying, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tripp’d lightly on, in sort of deathful glee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laughing at the clear stream and setting sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though they jests had been: nor had he done</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His laugh at nature’s holy countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until that grove appear’d, as if perchance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then his tongue with sober seemlihed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave utterance as he enter’d: “Ha!” I said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“King of the butterflies; but by this gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by old Rhadamanthus’ tongue of doom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This dusk religion, pomp of solitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Promethean clay by thief endued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By old Saturnus’ forelock, by his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shook with eternal palsy, I did wed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself to things of light from infancy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus to be cast out, thus lorn to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is sure enough to make a mortal man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grow impious.” So he inwardly began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On things for which no wording can be found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deeper and deeper sinking, until drown’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the reach of music: for the choir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Cynthia he heard not, though rough brier</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor muffling thicket interposed to dull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vesper hymn, far swollen, soft and full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the dark pillars of those sylvan aisles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw not the two maidens, nor their smiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wan as primroses gather’d at midnight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By chilly-finger’d spring. “Unhappy wight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endymion!” said Peona, “we are here!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wouldst thou ere we all are laid on bier?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he embraced her, and his lady’s hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press’d, saying: “Sister, I would have command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it were heaven’s will, on our sad fate.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which that dark-eyed stranger stood elate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, in a new voice, but sweet as love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Endymion’s amaze: “By Cupid’s dove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so thou shalt! and by the lily truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my own breast thou shalt, beloved youth!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as she spake, into her face there came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light, as reflected from a silver flame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her long black hair swell’d ampler, in display</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full golden; in her eyes a brighter day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dawn’d blue, and full of love. Aye, he beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phœbe, his passion! joyous she upheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her lucid bow, continuing thus: “Drear, drear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has our delaying been; but foolish fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withheld me first; and then decrees of fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then ’twas fit that from this mortal state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shouldst, my love, by some unlook’d-for change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be spiritualized. Peona, we shall range</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These forests, and to thee they safe shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As was thy cradle; hither shalt thou flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet us many a time.” Next Cynthia bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peona kiss’d, and bless’d with fair good night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her brother kiss’d her too, and knelt adown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before his goddess, in a blissful swoon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gave her fair hands to him, and behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before three swiftest kisses he had told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They vanish’d far away!⁠—Peona went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home through the gloomy wood in wonderment.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="on-oxford" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Oxford</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">The Gothic looks solemn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The plain Doric column</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Supports an old Bishop and Crozier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The mouldering arch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Shaded o’er by a larch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands next door to Wilson the Hosier.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Vice,⁠—that is, by turns,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O’er pale faces mourns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The black tassell’d trencher and common hat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The charity boy sings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The Steeple-bell rings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as for the Chancellor⁠—<i xml:lang="la">dominat</i>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">There are plenty of trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And plenty of ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plenty of fat deer for Parsons;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And when it is venison,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Short is the benison,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then each on a leg or thigh fastens.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On ⸻</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Think not of it, sweet one, so;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give it not a tear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sigh thou mayst, and bid it go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Any⁠—any where.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Do not look so sad, sweet one,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sad and fadingly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shed one drop, then it is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Oh! ’twas born to die!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still so pale? then dearest weep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weep, I’ll count the tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For each will I invent a bliss</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thee in after years.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Brighter has it left thine eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than a sunny rill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy whispering melodies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are more tender still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet⁠—as all things mourn awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At fleeting blisses;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en let us too; but be our dirge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A dirge of kisses.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lines" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lines</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Unfelt, unheard, unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ve left my little queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her languid arms in silver slumber lying:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah! through their nestling touch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who⁠—who could tell how much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is for madness⁠—cruel, or complying?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Those faery lids how sleek!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those lips how moist!⁠—they speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ripest quiet, shadows of sweet sounds:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into my fancy’s ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melting a burden dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How “Love doth know no fulness, and no bounds.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">True!⁠—tender monitors!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I bend unto your laws:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This sweetest day for dalliance was born!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, without more ado,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ll feel my heaven anew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all the blushing of the hasty morn.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="stanzas" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Stanzas</h2>
			<p>
				<span>In a drear-nighted December</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Too happy, happy tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy branches ne’er remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Their green felicity:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The north cannot undo them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a sleety whistle through them</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor frozen thawings glue them</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">From budding at the prime.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In a drear-nighted December,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Too happy, happy brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy bubblings ne’er remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Apollo’s summer look;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But with a sweet forgetting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They stay their crystal fretting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never, never petting</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">About the frozen time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! would ’twere so with many</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A gentle girl and boy!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But were there ever any</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Writh’d not at passèd joy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To know the change and feel it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When there is none to heal it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor numbèd sense to steal it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Was never said in rhyme.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-cat" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To a Cat</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Cat! who hast pass’d thy grand climacteric,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How many mice and rats hast in thy days</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Destroy’d?⁠—How many tit-bits stolen? Gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With those bright languid segments green, and prick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those velvet ears⁠—but pr’ythee do not stick</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy latent talons in me⁠—and upraise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy gentle mew⁠—and tell me all thy frays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fish and mice, and rats and tender chick:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, look not down, nor lick thy dainty wrists</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all the wheezy asthma,⁠—and for all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy tail’s tip is nick’d off⁠—and though the fists</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of many a maid has given thee many a maul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still is that fur as soft as when the lists</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In youth thou enter’dst on glass-bottled wall.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sharing-eves-apple" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Sharing Eve’s Apple</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O blush not so! O blush not so!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or I shall think you knowing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if you smile the blushing while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then maidenheads are going.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There’s a blush for won’t, and a blush for shan’t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a blush for having done it:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s a blush for thought and a blush for nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a blush for just begun it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O sigh not so! O sigh not so!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For it sounds of Eve’s sweet Pippin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By these loosen’d lips you have tasted the pips</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fought in an amorous nipping.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Will you play once more at nice-cut-core,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For it only will last our youth out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we have the prime of the kissing time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We have not one sweet tooth out.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There’s a sigh for yes, and a sigh for no,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a sigh for I can’t bear it!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O what can be done, shall we stay or run?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O cut the sweet apple and share it!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="what-the-thrush-said" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">What the Thrush Said</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O thou whose face hath felt the Winter’s wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose eye has seen the snow-clouds hung in mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the black elm tops ’mong the freezing stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee the spring will be a harvest-time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O thou, whose only book has been the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of supreme darkness which thou feddest on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Night after night when Phœbus was away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee the Spring shall be a triple morn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O fret not after knowledge⁠—I have none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet my song comes native with the warmth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O fret not after knowledge⁠—I have none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet the Evening listens. He who saddens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thought of idleness cannot be idle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he’s awake who thinks himself asleep.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="robin-hood" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Robin Hood</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">To a Friend</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>No! those days are gone away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their hours are old and gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their minutes buried all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the down-trodden pall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the leaves of many years:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many times have Winter’s shears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frozen North, and chilling East,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounded tempests to the feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the forest’s whispering fleeces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since men knew nor rent nor leases.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">No, the bugle sounds no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the twanging bow no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent is the ivory shrill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past the heath and up the hill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no mid-forest laugh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where lone Echo gives the half</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To some wight, amaz’d to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jesting, deep in forest drear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">On the fairest time of June</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You may go, with sun or moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the seven stars to light you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the polar ray to right you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you never may behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little John, or Robin bold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never one, of all the clan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrumming on an empty can</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some old hunting ditty, while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He doth his green way beguile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fair hostess Merriment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down beside the pasture Trent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he left the merry tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Messenger for spicy ale.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Gone, the merry morris din;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone, the song of Gamelyn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone, the tough-belted outlaw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idling in the “<i xml:lang="enm">grenè shawe</i>;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All are gone away and past!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if Robin should be cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sudden from his turfèd grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if Marian should have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once again her forest days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She would weep, and he would craze:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would swear, for all his oaks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall’n beneath the dock-yard strokes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have rotted on the briny seas;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She would weep that her wild bees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang not to her⁠—strange! that honey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can’t be got without hard money!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">So it is; yet let us sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honour to the old bow-string!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honour to the bugle horn!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honour to the woods unshorn!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honour to the Lincoln green!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honour to the archer keen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honour to tight little John,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the horse he rode upon!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honour to bold Robin Hood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleeping in the underwood!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honour to Maid Marian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to all the Sherwood clan!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though their days have hurried by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us two a burden try.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lines-on-the-mermaid-tavern" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lines on the Mermaid Tavern</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Souls of Poets dead and gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What Elysium have ye known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy field or mossy cavern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choicer than the Mermaid Tavern?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have ye tippled drink more fine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than mine host’s Canary wine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or are fruits of Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeter than those dainty pies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of venison? O generous food!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drest as though bold Robin Hood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would, with his maid Marian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sup and bowse from horn and can.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I have heard that on a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine host’s sign-board flew away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobody knew whither, till</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An astrologer’s old quill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a sheepskin gave the story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said he saw you in your glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath a new-old sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sipping beverage divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pledging with contented smack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Mermaid in the Zodiac.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Souls of Poets dead and gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What Elysium have ye known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy field or mossy cavern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choicer than the Mermaid Tavern?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-song-of-opposites" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">A Song of Opposites</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span class="i3">Under the flag</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of each his faction, they to battle bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their embryo atoms.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Milton</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Welcome joy, and welcome sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lethe’s weed and Hermes’ feather;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come to-day, and come to-morrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I do love you both together!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I love to mark sad faces in fair weather;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hear a merry laugh amid the thunder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair and foul I love together.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meadows sweet where flames are under,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a giggle at a wonder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Visage sage at pantomime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Funeral, and steeple-chime;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Infant playing with a skull;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Morning fair, and shipwreck’d hull;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nightshade with the woodbine kissing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serpents in red roses hissing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleopatra regal-dress’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the aspic at her breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dancing music, music sad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both together, sane and mad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Muses bright, and muses pale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sombre Saturn, Momus hale;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laugh and sigh, and laugh again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, the sweetness of the pain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Muses bright and muses pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bare your faces of the veil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me see; and let me write</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the day, and of the night⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both together:⁠—let me slake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All my thirst for sweet heart-ache!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let my bower be of yew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Interwreath’d with myrtles new:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pines and lime-trees full in bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my couch a low grass-tomb.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-seeing-a-lock-of-miltons-hair" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Seeing a Lock of Milton’s Hair</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Chief of organic numbers!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Old Scholar of the Spheres!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy spirit never slumbers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But rolls about our ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ever and for ever!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O what a mad endeavour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Worketh he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who to thy sacred and ennobled hearse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would offer a burnt sacrifice of verse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And melody.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">How heavenward thou soundest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Live Temple of sweet noise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Discord unconfoundest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Giving Delight new joys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Pleasure nobler pinions!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O, where are thy dominions?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Lend thine ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a young Delian oath,⁠—ay, by thy soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By all that from thy mortal lips did roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the kernel of thine earthly love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty, in things on earth, and things above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">I swear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When every childish fashion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Has vanish’d from my rhyme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will I, grey-gone in passion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Leave to an after-time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Hymning and harmony</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thee, and of thy works, and of thy life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But vain is now the burning and the strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pangs are in vain, until I grow high-rife</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">With old Philosophy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mad with glimpses of futurity!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For many years my offering must be hush’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When I do speak, I’ll think upon this hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because I feel my forehead hot and flush’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even at the simplest vassal of thy power,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A lock of thy bright hair⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Sudden it came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I was startled, when I caught thy name</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Coupled so unaware;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, at the moment, temperate was my blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought I had beheld it from the flood.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="wheres-the-poet-show-him-show-him" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">“Where’s the Poet? Show Him! Show Him”</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Where’s the Poet? Show him! show him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Muses nine! that I may know him!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis the man who with a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is an equal, be he King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or poorest of the beggar-clan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or any other wondrous thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man may be ’twixt ape and Plato;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis the man who with a bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wren, or Eagle, finds his way to</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All its instincts; he hath heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lion’s roaring, and can tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What his horny throat expresseth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to him the Tiger’s yell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Comes articulate and presseth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his ear like mother-tongue.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-draught-of-sunshine" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Draught of Sunshine</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Hence Burgundy, Claret, and Port,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Away with old Hock and Madeira,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too earthly ye are for my sport;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There’s a beverage brighter and clearer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of a pitiful rummer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My wine overbrims a whole summer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My bowl is the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I drink at my eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till I feel in the brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A Delphian pain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then follow, my Caius! then follow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On the green of the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We will drink our fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of golden sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till our brains intertwine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the glory and grace of Apollo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God of the Meridian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And of the East and West,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee my soul is flown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And my body is earthward press’d.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is an awful mission,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A terrible division;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaves a gulf austere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be fill’d with worldly fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aye, when the soul is fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To high above our head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Affrighted do we gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After its airy maze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As doth a mother wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When her young infant child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in an eagle’s claws⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And is not this the cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of madness?⁠—God of Song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou bearest me along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through sights I scarce can bear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O let me, let me share</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the hot lyre and thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The staid Philosophy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Temper my lonely hours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let me see thy bowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More unalarm’d!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Song</span>
				<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Hush, Hush! Tread Softly!</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="song-1-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Hush, hush! tread softly! hush, hush, my dear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All the house is asleep, but we know very well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the jealous, the jealous old bald-pate may hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho’ you’ve padded his night-cap⁠—O sweet Isabel!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Tho’ your feet are more light than a Faery’s feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Who dances on bubbles where brooklets meet⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hush, hush! soft tiptoe! hush, hush, my dear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For less than a nothing the jealous can hear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="song-1-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>No leaf doth tremble, no ripple is there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the river,⁠—all’s still, and the night’s sleepy eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Closes up, and forgets all its Lethean care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Charm’d to death by the drone of the humming May-fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And the Moon, whether prudish or complaisant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Has fled to her bower, well knowing I want</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No light in the dusk, no torch in the gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my Isabel’s eyes, and her lips pulp’d with bloom.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="song-1-3">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lift the latch! ah gently! ah tenderly⁠—sweet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We are dead if that latchet gives one little clink!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well done⁠—now those lips, and a flowery seat⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The old man may sleep, and the planets may wink;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The shut rose shall dream of our loves and awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Full-blown, and such warmth for the morning take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stock-dove shall hatch her soft brace and shall coo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I kiss to the melody, aching all through.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="extracts-from-an-opera" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Extracts from an Opera</h2>
			<article id="o-were-i-one-of-the-olympian-twelve" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4>“O! Were I One of the Olympian Twelve”</h4>
				<p>
					<span>O! were I one of the Olympian twelve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their godships should pass this into a law,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when a man doth set himself in toil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After some beauty veiled far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each step he took should make his lady’s hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More soft, more white, and her fair cheek more fair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for each briar-berry he might eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kiss should bud upon the tree of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pulp and ripen richer every hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To melt away upon the traveller’s lips.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="daisys-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4>Daisy’s Song</h4>
				<p>
					<span>The sun, with his great eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sees not so much as I;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the moon, all silver-proud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might as well be in a cloud.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And O the spring⁠—the spring!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lead the life of a King!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Couch’d in the teeming grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I spy each pretty lass.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I look where no one dares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I stare where no one stares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the night is nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lambs bleat my lullaby.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="follys-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4>Folly’s Song</h4>
				<p>
					<span>When wedding fiddles are a-playing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Huzza for folly O!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when maidens go a-Maying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Huzza, <abbr>etc.</abbr></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When a milk-pail is upset,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Huzza, <abbr>etc.</abbr></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the clothes left in the wet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Huzza, <abbr>etc.</abbr></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the barrel’s set abroach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Huzza, <abbr>etc.</abbr></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Kate Eyebrow keeps a coach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Huzza, <abbr>etc.</abbr></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the pig is over-roasted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Huzza, <abbr>etc.</abbr></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the cheese is over-toasted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Huzza, <abbr>etc.</abbr></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Sir Snap is with his lawyer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Huzza, <abbr>etc.</abbr></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Miss Chip has kiss’d the sawyer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Huzza, <abbr>etc.</abbr></span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="oh-i-am-frightend-with-most-hateful-thoughts" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4>“Oh, I Am Frighten’d with Most Hateful Thoughts!”</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, I am frighten’d with most hateful thoughts!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps her voice is not a nightingale’s,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps her teeth are not the fairest pearl;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eye-lashes may be, for aught I know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not longer than the May-fly’s small fanhorns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There may not be one dimple on her hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And freckles many; ah! a careless nurse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In haste to teach the little thing to walk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May have crumpt up a pair of Dian’s legs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And warpt the ivory of a Juno’s neck.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="song-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4 epub:type="title">
					<span>Song</span>
					<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">The Stranger Lighted from His Steed</span>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>The stranger lighted from his steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ere he spake a word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seiz’d my lady’s lily hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kiss’d it all unheard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The stranger walk’d into the hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ere he spake a word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He kiss’d my lady’s cherry lips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kiss’d ’em all unheard.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The stranger walk’d into the bower,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But my lady first did go⁠,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ay hand in hand into the bower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where my Lord’s roses blow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My lady’s maid had a silken scarf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a golden ring had she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a kiss from the stranger, as off he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again on his palfrey.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="asleep-o-sleep-a-little-while-white-pearl" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h4>“Asleep! O Sleep a Little While, White Pearl”</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Asleep! O sleep a little while, white pearl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let me kneel, and let me pray to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let me call Heaven’s blessing on thine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let me breathe into the happy air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That doth enfold and touch thee all about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vows or my slavery, my giving up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sudden adoration, my great love!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</article>
		<article id="faery-songs" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Faery Songs</h2>
			<section id="faery-songs-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Shed no tear! O shed no tear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flower will bloom another year.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weep no more! O weep no more!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young buds sleep in the root’s white core.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dry your eyes! O dry your eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I was taught in Paradise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ease my breast of melodies⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Shed no tear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Overhead! look overhead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mong the blossoms white and red⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look up, look up⁠—I flutter now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this flush pomegranate bough.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See me! ’tis this silvery bill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever cures the good man’s ill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shed no tear! O shed no tear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flower will bloom another year.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu, Adieu⁠—I fly, adieu,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I vanish in the heaven’s blue⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Adieu, Adieu!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="faery-songs-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! woe is me! poor silver-wing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I must chant thy lady’s dirge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And death to this fair haunt of spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of melody, and streams of flowery verge,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Poor silver-wing! ah! woe is me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">That I must see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These blossoms snow upon thy lady’s pall!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Go, pretty page! and in her ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whisper that the hour is near!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Softly tell her not to fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such calm favonian burial!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Go, pretty page! and soothly tell,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blossoms hang by a melting spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fall they must, ere a star wink thrice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Upon her closed eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now in vain are weeping their last tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At sweet life leaving, and those arbours green,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich dowry from the Spirit of the Spheres,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Alas! poor Queen!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="on-sitting-down-to-read-king-lear-once-again" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Sitting Down to Read <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">King Lear</i> Once Again</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O golden-tongued Romance, with serene lute!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair plumèd Syren, Queen of far away!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leave melodizing on this wintry day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shut up thine olden pages, and be mute:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adieu! for once again the fierce dispute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Betwixt damnation and impassion’d clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Must I burn through; once more humbly assay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bitter sweet of this Shakespearean fruit:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chief Poet! and ye clouds of Albion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Begetters of our deep eternal theme!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When through the old oak forest I am gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let me not wander in a barren dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when I am consumèd in the Fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me new Phœnix-wings to fly at my desire.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-8" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Sonnet</span>
				<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">When I Have Fears That I May Cease to Be</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When I have fears that I may cease to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before my pen has glean’d my teeming brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before high pilèd books, in charactry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hold like rich garners the full-ripen’d grain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I behold, upon the night’s starr’d face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Huge cloudy symbols of a high romance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And think that I may never live to trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their shadows, with the magic hand of chance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when I feel, fair creature of an hour!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I shall never look upon thee more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never have relish in the faery power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of unreflecting love;⁠—then on the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the wide world I stand alone, and think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Love and Fame to nothingness do sink.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-a-lady-seen-for-a-few-moments-at-vauxhall" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To a Lady Seen for a Few Moments at Vauxhall</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Time’s sea hath been five years at its slow ebb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Long hours have to and fro let creep the sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since I was tangled in thy beauty’s web,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And snared by the ungloving of thine hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet I never look on midnight sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But I behold thine eyes’ well-memoried light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot look upon the rose’s dye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But to thy cheek my soul doth take its flight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot look on any budding flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But my fond ear, in fancy at thy lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hearkening for a love-sound, doth devour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its sweets in the wrong sense:⁠—Thou dost eclipse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every delight with sweet remembering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grief unto my darling joys dost bring.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-spenser" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Spenser</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Spenser! a jealous honourer of thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A forester deep in thy midmost trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did last eve ask my promise to refine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some English that might strive thine ear to please.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Elfin Poet, ’tis impossible</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For an inhabitant of wintry earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rise like Phœbus with a golden quill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fire-wing’d and make a morning in his mirth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It is impossible to escape from toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ the sudden and receive thy spiriting:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flower must drink the nature of the soil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before it can put forth its blossoming:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be with me in the summer days, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will for thine honour and his pleasure try.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-nile" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Nile</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Son of the old moon-mountains African!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Chief of the Pyramid and Crocodile!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We call thee fruitful, and that very while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A desert fills our seeing’s inward span;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nurse of swart nations since the world began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Art thou so fruitful? or dost thou beguile</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such men to honour thee, who, worn with toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rest for a space ’twixt Cairo and Decan?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O may dark fancies err! They surely do;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis ignorance that makes a barren waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all beyond itself. Thou dost bedew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Green rushes like our rivers, and dost taste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pleasant sun-rise. Green isles hast thou too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to the sea as happily dost haste.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="written-in-answer-to-a-sonnet-ending-thus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Written in Answer to a Sonnet Ending Thus</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span class="i1">“Dark eyes are dearer far</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than those that mock the hyacinthine bell.”</span>
					</p>
					<cite>By <abbr class="name">J. H.</abbr> Reynolds</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Blue! ’Tis the life of heaven,⁠—the domain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Cynthia,⁠—the wide palace of the sun,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tent of Hesperus, and all his train,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bosomer of clouds, gold, gray, and dun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue! ’Tis the life of waters⁠—ocean</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all its vassal streams, pools numberless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May rage, and foam, and fret, but never can</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Subside, if not to dark blue nativeness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue! Gentle cousin of the forest-green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Married to green in all the sweetest flowers,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forget-me-not,⁠—the blue bell,⁠—and, that queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of secrecy, the violet: what strange powers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou, as a mere shadow! But how great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When in an Eye thou art, alive with fate!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-homer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Homer</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Standing aloof in giant ignorance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of thee I hear and of the Cyclades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one who sits ashore and longs perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To visit dolphin-coral in deep seas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So thou wast blind!⁠—but then the veil was rent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Jove uncurtain’d Heaven to let thee live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Neptune made for thee a spumy tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Pan made sing for thee his forest-hive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ay on the shores of darkness there is light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And precipices show untrodden green;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a budding morrow in midnight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There is a triple sight in blindness keen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such seeing hadst thou, as it once befell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Dian, Queen of Earth, and Heaven, and Hell.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-john-hamilton-reynolds" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To John Hamilton Reynolds</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O that a week could be an age, and we</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Felt parting and warm meeting every week;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then one poor year a thousand years would be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flush of welcome ever on the cheek:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So could we live long life in little space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So time itself would be annihilate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So a day’s journey in oblivious haze</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To serve our joys would lengthen and dilate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O to arrive each Monday morn from Ind!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To land each Tuesday from the rich Levant!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In little time a host of joys to bind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And keep our souls in one eternal pant!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This morn, my friend, and yester-evening taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me how to harbor such a happy thought.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-human-seasons" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Human Seasons</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Four Seasons fill the measure of the year;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There are four seasons in the mind of man:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has his lusty Spring, when fancy clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Takes in all beauty with an easy span:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has his Summer, when luxuriously</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spring’s honied cud of youthful thought he loves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ruminate, and by such dreaming high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is nearest unto heaven: quiet coves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His soul has in its Autumn, when his wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He furleth close; contented so to look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On mists in idleness⁠—to let fair things</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pass by unheeded as a threshold brook.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has his Winter too of pale misfeature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else he would forego his mortal nature.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-devon-maid" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Devon Maid</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Where be ye going, you Devon Maid?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And what have ye there in the Basket?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye tight little fairy just fresh from the dairy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will ye give me some cream if I ask it?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I love your Meads, and I love your flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I love your junkets mainly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’hind the door I love kissing more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O look not so disdainly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I love your hills, and I love your dales,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I love your flocks a-bleating⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But O, on the heather to lie together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With both our hearts a-beating!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I’ll put your Basket all safe in a nook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your shawl I hang up on the willow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we will sigh in the daisy’s eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And kiss on a grass green pillow.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="epistle-to-john-hamilton-reynolds" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Epistle to John Hamilton Reynolds</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Dear Reynolds! As last night I lay in bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There came before my eyes that wonted thread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shapes, and shadows, and remembrances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That every other minute vex and please:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Things all disjointed come from north and south,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two Witch’s eyes above a Cherub’s mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Voltaire with casque and shield and habergeon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Alexander with his nightcap on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Socrates a-tying his cravat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hazlitt playing with Miss Edgeworth’s cat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Junius Brutus, pretty well so so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making the best of ’s way towards Soho.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Few are there who escape these visitings,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps one or two whose lives have patent wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thro’ whose curtains peeps no hellish nose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No wild-boar tushes, and no Mermaid’s toes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But flowers bursting out with lusty pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And young Æolian harps personify’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some Titian colours touch’d into real life,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacrifice goes on; the pontiff knife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleams in the Sun, the milk-white heifer lows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pipes go shrilly, the libation flows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white sail shows above the green-head cliff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moves round the point, and throws her anchor stiff;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mariners join hymn with those on land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">You know the Enchanted Castle,⁠—it doth stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a rock, on the border of a Lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nested in trees, which all do seem to shake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From some old magic-like Urganda’s sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Phœbus! that I had thy sacred word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show this Castle, in fair dreaming wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto my friend, while sick and ill he lies!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">You know it well enough, where it doth seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mossy place, a Merlin’s Hall, a dream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You know the clear Lake, and the little Isles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mountains blue, and cold near neighbour rills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All which elsewhere are but half animate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There do they look alive to love and hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To smiles and frowns; they seem a lifted mound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above some giant, pulsing underground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Part of the building was a chosen See,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Built by a banish’d Santon of Chaldee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other part, two thousand years from him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was built by Cuthbert de Saint Aldebrim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then there’s a little wing, far from the Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Built by a Lapland Witch turn’d maudlin Nun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many other juts of aged stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Founded with many a mason-devil’s groan.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The doors all look as if they op’d themselves:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The windows as if latch’d by Fays and Elves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from them comes a silver flash of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from the westward of a Summer’s night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or like a beauteous woman’s large blue eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone mad through olden songs and poesies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">See! what is coming from the distance dim!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A golden Galley all in silken trim!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three rows of oars are lightning, moment whiles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the verd’rous bosoms of those isles;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards the shade, under the Castle wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It comes in silence,⁠—now ’tis hidden all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Clarion sounds, and from a Postern-gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An echo of sweet music doth create</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fear in the poor Herdsman who doth bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beasts to trouble the enchanted spring,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tells of the sweet music, and the spot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all his friends, and they believe him not.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">O that our dreamings all, of sleep or wake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would all their colours from the sunset take:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From something of material sublime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather than shadow our own soul’s day-time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dark void of night. For in the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We jostle,⁠—but my flag is not unfurl’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the Admiral-staff⁠—and so philosophise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dare not yet! O, never will the prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High reason, and the love of good and ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be my award! Things cannot to the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be settled, but they tease us out of thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or is it imagination brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond its proper bound, yet still confin’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost in a sort of Purgatory blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot refer to any standard law</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of either earth or heaven? It is a flaw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In happiness, to see beyond our bourn.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It forces us in summer skies to mourn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It spoils the singing of the Nightingale.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Dear Reynolds! I have a mysterious tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cannot speak it: the first page I read</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a Lampit rock of green sea-weed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the breakers; ’twas a quiet eve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rocks were silent, the wide sea did weave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An untumultuous fringe of silver foam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the flat brown sand; I was at home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And should have been most happy,⁠—but I saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too far into the sea, where every maw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greater on the less feeds evermore.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I saw too distinct into the core</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of an eternal fierce destruction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so from happiness I far was gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still am I sick of it, and tho’ to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve gather’d young spring-leaves, and flowers gay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of periwinkle and wild strawberry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still do I that most fierce destruction see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Shark at savage prey,⁠—the Hawk at pounce,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gentle Robin, like a Pard or Ounce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ravening a worm,⁠—Away, ye horrid moods!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moods of one’s mind! You know I hate them well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You know I’d sooner be a clapping Bell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To some Kamschatkan Missionary Church,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than with these horrid moods be left i’ the lurch.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="at-teignmouth" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">At Teignmouth</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Here all the summer could I stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For there’s Bishop’s teign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And King’s teign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Coomb at the clear teign head⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where close by the stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You may have your cream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All spread upon barley bread.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">There’s arch Brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there’s larch Brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both turning many a mill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cooling the drouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the salmon’s mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fattening his silver gill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">There is Wild wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A Mild hood</span>
				<span>To the sheep on the lea o’ the down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the golden furze</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With its green, thin spurs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth catch at the maiden’s gown.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">There is Newton marsh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With its spear grass harsh,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pleasant summer level</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the maidens sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the Market Street,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do meet in the dusk to revel.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">There’s the Barton rich</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With dyke and ditch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hedge for the thrush to live in;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the hollow tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the buzzing bee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a bank for the wasp to hive in.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And O, and O</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The daisies blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the primroses are waken’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the violets white</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sit in silver light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the green bud’s as long as the spike end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then who would go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into dark Soho,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chatter with dank’d hair’d critics,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When he can stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the new-mown hay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And startle the dappled crickets?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="fragment-of-an-ode-to-maia" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Fragment of an Ode to Maia</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Mother of Hermes! and still youthful Maia!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">May I sing to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou wast hymned on the shores of Baiae?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Or may I woo thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In earlier Sicilian? or thy smiles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek as they once were sought, in Grecian isles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By bards who died content on pleasant sward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Leaving great verse unto a little clan?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, give me their old vigour, and unheard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save of the quiet Primrose, and the span</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of heaven and few ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rounded by thee, my song should die away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Content as theirs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich in the simple worship of a day.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Isabella, or the Pot of Basil</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">A Story from Boccaccio</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Fair Isabel, poor simple Isabel!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lorenzo, a young palmer in love’s eye!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could not in the self-same mansion dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without some stir of heart, some malady;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could not sit at meals but feel how well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It soothed each to be the other by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could not, sure, beneath the same roof sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to each other dream, and nightly weep.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>With every morn their love grew tenderer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With every eve deeper and tenderer still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He might not in house, field, or garden stir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her full shape would all his seeing fill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his continual voice was pleasanter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her, than noise of trees or hidden rill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her lute-string gave an echo of his name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She spoilt her half-done broidery with the same.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-3">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He knew whose gentle hand was at the latch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the door had given her to his eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from her chamber-window he would catch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her beauty farther than the falcon spies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And constant as her vespers would he watch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because her face was turn’d to the same skies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with sick longing all the night outwear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear her morning-step upon the stair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-4">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>A whole long month of May in this sad plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made their cheeks paler by the break of June:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“To-morrow will I bow to my delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To-morrow will I ask my lady’s boon.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O may I never see another night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lorenzo, if thy lips breathe not love’s tune.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So spake they to their pillows; but, alas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honeyless days and days did he let pass;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-5">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Until sweet Isabella’s untouch’d cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell sick within the rose’s just domain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell thin as a young mother’s, who doth seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By every lull to cool her infant’s pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How ill she is!” said he, “I may not speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet I will, and tell my love all plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If looks speak love-laws, I will drink her tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the least ’twill startle off her cares.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-6">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>So said he one fair morning, and all day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His heart beat awfully against his side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his heart he inwardly did pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For power to speak; but still the ruddy tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stifled his voice, and pulsed resolve away⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fever’d his high conceit of such a bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet brought him to the meekness of a child:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! when passion is both meek and wild!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-7">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>So once more he had waked and anguished</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dreary night of love and misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Isabel’s quick eye had not been wed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To every symbol on his forehead high:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She saw it waxing very pale and dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And straight all flush’d; so, lisped tenderly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lorenzo!”⁠—here she ceased her timid quest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in her tone and look he read the rest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-8">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“O Isabella, I can half perceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I may speak my grief into thine ear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou didst ever anything believe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Believe how I love thee, believe how near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul is to its doom: I would not grieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy hand by unwelcome pressing, would not fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine eyes by gazing; but I cannot live</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another night, and not my passion shrive.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-9">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Love! thou art leading me from wintry cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lady! thou leadest me to summer clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I must taste the blossoms that unfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In its ripe warmth this gracious morning time.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So said, his erewhile timid lips grew bold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And poesied with hers in dewy rhyme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great bliss was with them, and great happiness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew, like a lusty flower in June’s caress.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-10">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Parting they seem’d to tread upon the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twin roses by the zephyr blown apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only to meet again more close, and share</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The inward fragrance of each other’s heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She, to her chamber gone, a ditty fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sang, of delicious love and honey’d dart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with light steps went up a western hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade the sun farewell, and joy’d his fill.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-11">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>All close they met again, before the dusk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had taken from the stars its pleasant veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All close they met, all eves, before the dusk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had taken from the stars its pleasant veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close in a bower of hyacinth and musk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unknown of any, free from whispering tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! better had it been forever so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than idle ears should pleasure in their woe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-12">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Were they unhappy then?⁠—It cannot be⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too many tears for lovers have been shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too many sighs give we to them in fee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too much of pity after they are dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too many doleful stories do we see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose matter in bright gold were best be read;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except in such a page where Theseus’ spouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the pathless waves towards him bows.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-13">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But, for the general award of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The little sweet doth kill much bitterness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Dido silent is in under-grove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Isabella’s was a great distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though young Lorenzo in warm Indian clove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was not embalm’d, this truth is not the less⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even bees, the little almsmen of spring-bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Know there is richest juice in poison-flowers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-14">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>With her two brothers this fair lady dwelt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enriched from ancestral merchandise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for them many a weary hand did swelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In torched mines and noisy factories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many once proud-quiver’d loins did melt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In blood from stinging whip;⁠—with hollow eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many all day in dazzling river stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take the rich-ored driftings of the flood.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-15">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>For them the Ceylon diver held his breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And went all naked to the hungry shark;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For them his ears gush’d blood; for them in death</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The seal on the cold ice with piteous bark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay full of darts; for them alone did seethe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand men in troubles wide and dark:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-ignorant, they turn’d an easy wheel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That set sharp racks at work, to pinch and peel.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-16">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Why were they proud? Because their marble founts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gush’d with more pride than do a wretch’s tears?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why were they proud? Because fair orange-mounts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were of more soft ascent than lazar stairs?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why were they proud? Because red-lined accounts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were richer than the songs of Grecian years?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why were they proud? again we ask aloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why in the name of Glory were they proud?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-17">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Yet were these Florentines as self-retired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hungry pride and gainful cowardice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As two close Hebrews in that land inspired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Paled in and vineyarded from beggar-spies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hawks of ship-mast forests⁠—the untired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pannier’d mules for ducats and old lies⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quick cat’s-paws on the generous stray-away,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great wits in Spanish, Tuscan, and Malay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-18">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How was it these same ledger-men could spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fair Isabella in her downy nest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How could they find out in Lorenzo’s eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A straying from his toil? Hot Egypt’s pest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into their vision covetous and sly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How could these money-bags see east and west?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet so they did⁠—and every dealer fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must see behind, as doth the hunted hare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-19">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O eloquent and famed Boccaccio!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thee we now should ask forgiving boon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of thy spicy myrtles as they blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of thy roses amorous of the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of thy lilies, that do paler grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now they can no more hear thy ghittern’s tune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For venturing syllables that ill beseem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The quiet glooms of such a piteous theme.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-20">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Grant thou a pardon here, and then the tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall move on soberly, as it is meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no other crime, no mad assail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make old prose in modern rhyme more sweet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it is done⁠—succeed the verse or fail⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To honour thee, and thy gone spirit greet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stead thee as a verse in English tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An echo of thee in the north-wind sung.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-21">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>These brethren having found by many signs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What love Lorenzo for their sister had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how she loved him too, each unconfines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bitter thoughts to other, well-nigh mad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he, the servant of their trade designs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should in their sister’s love be blithe and glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When ’twas their plan to coax her by degrees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To some high noble and his olive-trees.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-22">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And many a jealous conference had they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many times they bit their lips alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before they fix’d upon a surest way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make the youngster for his crime atone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the last, these men of cruel clay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cut Mercy with a sharp knife to the bone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they resolved in some forest dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To kill Lorenzo, and there bury him.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-23">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>So on a pleasant morning, as he leant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the sunrise, o’er the balustrade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the garden-terrace, towards him they bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their footing through the dews; and to him said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“You seem there in the quiet of content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lorenzo, and we are most loth to invade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calm speculation; but if you are wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bestride your steed while cold is in the skies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-24">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“To-day we purpose, aye, this hour we mount</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To spur three leagues towards the Apennine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come down, we pray thee, ere the hot sun count</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dewy rosary on the eglantine.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lorenzo, courteously as he was wont,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bow’d a fair greeting to these serpents’ whine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went in haste, to get in readiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With belt, and spur, and bracing huntsman’s dress.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-25">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And as he to the court-yard pass’d along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each third step did he pause, and listen’d oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he could hear his lady’s matin-song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or the light whisper of her footstep soft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he thus over his passion hung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He heard a laugh full musical aloft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, looking up, he saw her features bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smile through an in-door lattice, all delight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-26">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Love, Isabel!” said he, “I was in pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest I should miss to bid thee a good morrow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! what if I should lose thee, when so fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am to stifle all the heavy sorrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a poor three hours’ absence? but we’ll gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the amorous dark what day doth borrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good bye! I’ll soon be back.”⁠—“Good bye!” said she:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he went she chanted merrily.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-27">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>So the two brothers and their murder’d man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rode past fair Florence, to where Arno’s stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gurgles through straighten’d banks, and still doth fan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Itself with dancing bulrush, and the bream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keeps head against the freshets. Sick and wan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The brothers’ faces in the ford did seem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lorenzo’s flush with love.⁠—They pass’d the water</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a forest quiet for the slaughter.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-28">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>There was Lorenzo slain and buried in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There in that forest did his great love cease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! when a soul doth thus its freedom win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It aches in loneliness⁠—is ill at peace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the break-covert bloodhounds of such sin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They dipp’d their swords in the water, and did tease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their horses homeward, with convulsed spur,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each richer by his being a murderer.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-29">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>They told their sister how, with sudden speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lorenzo had ta’en ship for foreign lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because of some great urgency and need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their affairs, requiring trusty hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor Girl! put on thy stifling widow’s weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ’scape at once from Hope’s accursed bands:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-day thou wilt not see him, nor to-morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the next day will be a day of sorrow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-30">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She weeps alone for pleasures not to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sorely she wept until the night came on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, instead of love, O misery!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She brooded o’er the luxury alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His image in the dusk she seem’d to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the silence made a gentle moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spreading her perfect arms upon the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on her couch low murmuring, “Where? O where?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-31">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But Selfishness, Love’s cousin, held not long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its fiery vigil in her single breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fretted for the golden hour, and hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the time with feverish unrest⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not long⁠—for soon into her heart a throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of higher occupants, a richer zest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came tragic; passion not to be subdued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sorrow for her love in travels rude.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-32">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In the mid days of autumn, on their eves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The breath of Winter comes from far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sick west continually bereaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of some gold tinge, and plays a roundelay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of death among the bushes and the leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make all bare before he dares to stray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his north cavern. So sweet Isabel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By gradual decay from beauty fell,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-33">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Because Lorenzo came not. Oftentimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She ask’d her brothers, with an eye all pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Striving to be itself, what dungeon climes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could keep him off so long? They spake a tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time after time, to quiet her. Their crimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came on them, like a smoke from Hinnom’s vale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every night in dreams they groan’d aloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see their sister in her snowy shroud.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-34">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And she had died in drowsy ignorance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for a thing more deadly dark than all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It came like a fierce potion, drunk by chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which saves a sick man from the feather’d pall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For some few gasping moments; like a lance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waking an Indian from his cloudy hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cruel pierce, and bringing him again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sense of the gnawing fire at heart and brain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-35">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>It was a vision.⁠—In the drowsy gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dull of midnight, at her couch’s foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lorenzo stood, and wept: the forest tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had marr’d his glossy hair which once could shoot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lustre into the sun, and put cold doom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his lips, and taken the soft lute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his lorn voice, and past his loamed ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had made a miry channel for his tears.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-36">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Strange sound it was, when the pale shadow spake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For there was striving, in its piteous tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speak as when on earth it was awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Isabella on its music hung:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Languor there was in it, and tremulous shake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in a palsied Druid’s harp unstrung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through it moan’d a ghostly undersong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like hoarse night-gusts sepulchral briars among.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-37">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Its eyes, though wild, were still all dewy bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With love, and kept all phantom fear aloof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the poor girl by magic of their light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The while it did unthread the horrid woof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the late darken’d time,⁠—the murderous spite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pride and avarice,⁠—the dark pine roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the forest,⁠—and the sodden turfed dell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, without any word, from stabs he fell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-38">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Saying moreover, “Isabel, my sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Red whortleberries droop above my head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a large flint-stone weighs upon my feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Around me beeches and high chestnuts shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their leaves and prickly nuts; a sheepfold bleat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comes from beyond the river to my bed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, shed one tear upon my heather-bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it shall comfort me within the tomb.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-39">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“I am a shadow now, alas! alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the skirts of human nature dwelling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone: I chant alone the holy mass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While little sounds of life are round me knelling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glossy bees at noon do fieldward pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many a chapel bell the hour is telling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paining me through: those sounds grow strange to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou art distant in Humanity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-40">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XL</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“I know what was, I feel full well what is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I should rage, if spirits could go mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I forget the taste of earthly bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That paleness warms my grave, as though I had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Seraph chosen from the bright abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be my spouse: thy paleness makes me glad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy beauty grows upon me, and I feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A greater love through all my essence steal.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-41">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The Spirit mourn’d “Adieu!”⁠—dissolved, and left</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The atom darkness in a slow turmoil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when of healthful midnight sleep bereft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking on rugged hours and fruitless toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We put our eyes into a pillowy cleft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And see the spangly gloom froth up and boil:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It made sad Isabella’s eyelids ache,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the dawn she started up awake.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-42">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Ha! ha!” said she, “I knew not this hard life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I thought the worst was simple misery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought some Fate with pleasure or with strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Portion’d us⁠—happy days, or else to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there is crime⁠—a brother’s bloody knife!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet Spirit, thou hast school’d my infancy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll visit thee for this, and kiss thine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greet thee morn and even in the skies.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-43">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When the full morning came, she had devised</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How she might secret to the forest hie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How she might find the clay, so dearly prized,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sing to it one latest lullaby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How her short absence might be unsurmised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While she the inmost of the dream would try.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resolved, she took with her an aged nurse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went into that dismal forest-hearse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-44">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>See, as they creep along the river side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How she doth whisper to that aged Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after looking round the champaign wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shows her a knife.⁠—“What feverous hectic flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burns in thee, child?⁠—what good can thee betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou shouldst smile again?”⁠—The evening came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they had found Lorenzo’s earthy bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flint was there, the berries at his head.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-45">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Who hath not loiter’d in a green churchyard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let his spirit, like a demon-mole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Work through the clayey soil and gravel hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see skull, coffin’d bones, and funeral stole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pitying each form that hungry Death hath marr’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And filling it once more with human soul?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! this is holiday to what was felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Isabella by Lorenzo knelt.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-46">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She gazed into the fresh-thrown mould, as though</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One glance did fully all its secrets tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clearly she saw, as other eyes would know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pale limbs at bottom of a crystal well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the murderous spot she seem’d to grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a native lily of the dell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with her knife, all sudden, she began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dig more fervently than misers can.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-47">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Soon she turn’d up a soiled glove, whereon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her silk had play’d in purple phantasies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She kiss’d it with a lip more chill than stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And put it in her bosom, where it dries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And freezes utterly unto the bone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those dainties made to still an infant’s cries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then ’gan she work again; nor stay’d her care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to throw back at times her veiling hair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-48">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>That old nurse stood beside her wondering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until her heart felt pity to the core</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At sight of such a dismal labouring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so she kneeled, with her locks all hoar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And put her lean hands to the horrid thing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three hours they labour’d at this travail sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last they felt the kernel of the grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Isabella did not stamp and rave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-49">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! wherefore all this wormy circumstance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why linger at the yawning tomb so long?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O for the gentleness of old Romance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The simple plaining of a minstrel’s song!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair reader, at the old tale take a glance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For here, in truth, it doth not well belong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speak:⁠—O turn thee to the very tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And taste the music of that vision pale.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-50">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">L</h3>
				<p>
					<span>With duller steel than the Perséan sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They cut away no formless monster’s head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one, whose gentleness did well accord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With death, as life. The ancient harps have said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love never dies, but lives, immortal Lord:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If Love impersonate was ever dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pale Isabella kiss’d it, and low moan’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas love; cold,⁠—dead indeed, but not dethron’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-51">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In anxious secrecy they took it home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then the prize was all for Isabel:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She calm’d its wild hair with a golden comb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all around each eye’s sepulchral cell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pointed each fringed lash; the smeared loam</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With tears, as chilly as a dripping well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She drench’d away: and still she comb’d, and kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighing all day⁠—and still she kiss’d and wept.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-52">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Then in a silken scarf,⁠—sweet with the dews</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of precious flowers pluck’d in Araby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And divine liquids come with odorous ooze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the cold serpent-pipe refreshfully,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wrapp’d it up; and for its tomb did choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A garden-pot, wherein she laid it by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cover’d it with mould, and o’er it set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet Basil, which her tears kept ever wet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-53">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And she forgot the stars, the moon, and sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she forgot the blue above the trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she forgot the dells where waters run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she forgot the chilly autumn breeze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had no knowledge when the day was done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the new morn she saw not: but in peace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung over her sweet Basil evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And moisten’d it with tears unto the core.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-54">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And so she ever fed it with thin tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence thick, and green, and beautiful it grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that it smelt more balmy than its peers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Basil-tufts in Florence; for it drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nurture besides, and life, from human fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the fast mouldering head there shut from view:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the jewel, safely casketed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came forth, and in perfumed leafits spread.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-55">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O Melancholy, linger here awhile!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Music, Music, breathe despondingly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Echo, Echo, from some sombre isle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unknown, Lethean, sigh to us⁠—O sigh!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirits in grief, lift up your heads, and smile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lift up your heads, sweet Spirits, heavily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make a pale light in your cypress glooms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tinting with silver wan your marble tombs.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-56">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Moan hither, all ye syllables of woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the deep throat of sad Melpomene!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through bronzed lyre in tragic order go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And touch the strings into a mystery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sound mournfully upon the winds and low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For simple Isabel is soon to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the dead: She withers, like a palm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cut by an Indian for its juicy balm.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-57">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O leave the palm to wither by itself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let not quick Winter chill its dying hour!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may not be⁠—those Baälites of pelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her brethren, noted the continual shower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her dead eyes: and many a curious elf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among her kindred, wonder’d that such dower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of youth and beauty should be thrown aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By one mark’d out to be a Noble’s bride.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-58">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And, furthermore, her brethren wonder’d much</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why she sat drooping by the Basil green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And why it flourish’d, as by magic touch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greatly they wonder’d what the thing might mean:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could not surely give belief, that such</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A very nothing would have power to wean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her from her own fair youth, and pleasures gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even remembrance of her love’s delay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-59">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore they watch’d a time when they might sift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This hidden whim; and long they watch’d in vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For seldom did she go to chapel-shrift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seldom felt she any hunger-pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when she left, she hurried back, as swift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As bird on wing to breast its eggs again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, patient as a hen-bird, sat her there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside her Basil, weeping through her hair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-60">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Yet they contrived to steal the Basil-pot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to examine it in secret place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thing was vile with green and livid spot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet they knew it was Lorenzo’s face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The guerdon of their murder they had got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so left Florence in a moment’s space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never to turn again.⁠—Away they went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With blood upon their heads, to banishment.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-61">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O Melancholy, turn thine eyes away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Music, Music, breathe despondingly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Echo, Echo, on some other day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From isles Lethean, sigh to us⁠—O sigh!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirits of grief, sing not your “Well-a-way!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Isabel, sweet Isabel, will die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will die a death too lone and incomplete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now they have ta’en away her Basil sweet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-62">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Piteous she look’d on dead and senseless things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Asking for her lost Basil amorously:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with melodious chuckle in the strings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her lorn voice, she oftentimes would cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the Pilgrim in his wanderings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ask him where her Basil was; and why</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas hid from her: “For cruel ’tis,” said she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“To steal my Basil-pot away from me.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil-63">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And so she pined, and so she died forlorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Imploring for her Basil to the last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No heart was there in Florence but did mourn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In pity of her love, so overcast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a sad ditty of this story born</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From mouth to mouth through all the country pass’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still is the burthen sung⁠—“O cruelty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To steal my Basil-pot away from me!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="an-extempore" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Extempore</h2>
			<section id="an-extempore-canto-12">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Canto the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span></h3>
				<p>
					<span>When they were come into the Faery’s Court</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They rang⁠—no one at home⁠—all gone to sport</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dance and kiss and love as faeries do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Faeries be as humans lovers true.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the woods they were so lone and wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where even the Robin feels himself exil’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where the very brooks, as if afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurry along to some less magic shade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No one at home!” the fretful Princess cry’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And all for nothing such a dreary ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all for nothing my new diamond cross;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No one to see my Persian feathers toss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No one to see my Ape, my Dwarf, my Fool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or how I pace my Otaheitan mule.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ape, Dwarf, and Fool, why stand you gaping there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burst the door open, quick⁠—or I declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll switch you soundly and in pieces tear.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Dwarf began to tremble, and the Ape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Star’d at the Fool, the Fool was all agape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Princess grasp’d her switch, but just in time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dwarf with piteous face began to rhyme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O mighty Princess, did you ne’er hear tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What your poor servants know but too too well?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Know you the three great crimes in Faeryland?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first, alas! poor Dwarf, I understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I made a whipstock of a faery’s wand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The next is snoring in their company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The next, the last, the direst of the three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is making free when they are not at home.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was a Prince⁠—a baby prince⁠—my doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You see, I made a whipstock of a wand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My top has henceforth slept in faery land.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was a Prince, the Fool, a grown-up Prince,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he has never been a King’s son since</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He fell a snoring at a faery Ball.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yon poor Ape was a Prince, and he poor thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Picklock’d a faery’s boudoir⁠—now no king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ape⁠—so pray your highness stay awhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis sooth indeed, we know it to our sorrow⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Persist and you may be an ape to-morrow.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the Dwarf spake, the Princess, all for spite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peel’d the brown hazel twig to lily white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clench’d her small teeth, and held her lips apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Try’d to look unconcern’d with beating heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They saw her highness had made up her mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A-quavering like the reeds before the wind⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they had had it, but O happy chance!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Ape for very fear began to dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grinn’d as all his ugliness did ache⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She staid her vixen fingers for his sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was so very ugly: then she took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her pocket-mirror and began to look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First at herself and then at him, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She smil’d at her own beauteous face again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet for all this⁠—for all her pretty face⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took it in her head to see the place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Women gain little from experience</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Either in Lovers, husbands, or expense.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more their beauty the more fortune too⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauty before the wide world never knew⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So each fair reasons⁠—tho’ it oft miscarries.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She thought <em>her</em> pretty face would please the faeries.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My darling Ape, I wont whip you to-day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me the Picklock sirrah and go play.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all three wept but counsel was as vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As crying cup biddy to drops of rain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet lingering by did the sad Ape forth draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Picklock from the Pocket in his Jaw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Princess took it, and dismounting straight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tripp’d in blue silver’d slippers to the gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And touch’d the wards, the Door full courteous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opened⁠—she enter’d with her servants three.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again it clos’d and there was nothing seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the Mule grazing on the herbage green.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="an-extempore-canto-13">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Canto the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></h3>
				<p>
					<span>The Mule no sooner saw himself alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than he prick’d up his Ears⁠—and said “well done;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At least unhappy Prince I may be free⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more a Princess shall side-saddle me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O King of Otaheite⁠—tho’ a Mule,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Aye, every inch a King’⁠—tho’ ‘Fortune’s Fool,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well done⁠—for by what <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dwarfy said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would not give a sixpence for her head.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as he spake he trotted in high glee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the knotty side of an old Pollard tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rubb’d his sides against the mossed bark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till his Girths burst and left him naked stark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except his Bridle⁠—how get rid of that</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Buckled and tied with many a twist and plait.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last it struck him to pretend to sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the thievish Monkeys down would creep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And filch the unpleasant trammels quite away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sooner thought of than adown he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shamm’d a good snore⁠—the Monkey-men descended</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whom they thought to injure they befriended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They hung his Bridle on a topmost bough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And off he went run, trot, or anyhow⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="spenserian-stanzas-on-charles-armitage-brown" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Spenserian Stanzas on Charles Armitage Brown</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">He is to weet a melancholy Carle:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thin in the waist, with bushy head of hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As hath the seeded thistle when in parle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It holds the Zephyr, ere it sendeth fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its light balloons into the summer air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There to his beard had not begun to bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No brush had touch’d his chin, or razor sheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No care had touched his cheek with mortal doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But new he was, and bright, as scarf from Persian loom.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Ne cared he for wine, or half-and-half;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ne cared he for fish, or flesh, or fowl;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sauces held he worthless as the chaff;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He’s deigned the swineherd at the wassail bowl;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ne with lewd ribbalds sat he cheek by jowl;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ne with sly Lemans in the scorner’s chair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But after water-brooks this Pilgrim’s soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Panted, and all his food was woodland air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he would oft-times feast on gilliflowers rare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The slang of cities in no wise he knew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><em>Tipping the wink</em> to him was heathen Greek;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sipp’d no “olden Tom,” or “ruin blue,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Nantz, or cherry-brandy, drunk full meek</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By many a Damsel hoarse, and rouge of cheek;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor did he know each aged Watchman’s beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor in obscured purlieus would he seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For curled Jewesses, with ankles neat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, as they walk abroad, make tinkling with their feet.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="two-or-three-posies" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Two or Three Posies</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Two or three Posies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With two or three simples⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three Noses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With two or three pimples⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three wise men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And two or three ninny’s⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three purses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And two or three guineas⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three raps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At two or three doors⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three naps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of two or three hours⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three Cats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And two or three mice⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three sprats</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At a very great price⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three sandies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And two or three tabbies⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three dandies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And two <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> ⸺⁠mum!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three Smiles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And two or three frowns⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three Miles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To two or three towns⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three pegs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For two or three bonnets⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three dove eggs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hatch into sonnets⁠—</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="acrostic-georgiana-augusta-keats" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Acrostic</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">Georgiana Augusta Keats</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Give me your patience, sister, while I frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exact in capitals your golden name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sue the fair Apollo and he will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rouse from his heavy slumber and instill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great love in me for thee and Poesy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imagine not that greatest mastery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kingdom over all the Realms of verse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nears more to heaven in aught, than when we nurse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And surety give to love and Brotherhood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Anthropophagi in Othello’s mood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulysses storm’d and his enchanted belt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glow with the Muse, but they are never felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unbosom’d so and so eternal made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such tender incense in their laurel shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the regent sisters of the Nine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As this poor offering to you, sister mine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Kind sister! ay, this third name says you are;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enchanted has it been the Lord knows where;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And may it taste to you like good old wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take you to real happiness and give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sons, daughters and a home like honied hive.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-song-about-myself" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Song About Myself</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There was a naughty Boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A naughty boy was he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would not stop at home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He could not quiet be⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He took</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In his Knapsack</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A Book</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Full of vowels;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And a shirt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With some towels⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A slight cap</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For night cap⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A hair brush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Comb ditto,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">New Stockings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For old ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Would split O!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">This Knapsack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Tight at ’s back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He rivetted close</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And follow’d his Nose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the North,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the North,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And follow’d his nose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the North.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was a naughty boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a naughty boy was he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For nothing would he do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But scribble poetry⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He took</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">An inkstand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And a Pen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Big as ten</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In a Pother</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And fountains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And ghostes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And Postes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And witches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And ditches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And wrote</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In his coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When the weather</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was cool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Fear of gout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And without</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When the weather</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was warm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Och the charm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When we choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To follow one’s nose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the north,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the north,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To follow one’s nose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the north.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was a naughty boy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a naughty boy was he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He kept little fishes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In washing tubs three</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In spite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the Maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Nor afraid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of his Granny⁠—good⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He often would,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hurly burly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Get up early,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">By hook or crook</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And bring home</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Miller’s thumb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Tittlebat</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Not over fat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Minnows small</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As the stall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of a glove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Not above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The size</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of a nice</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Little Baby’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Little fingers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O, he made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">’Twas his trade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Fish a pretty Kettle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A Kettle⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A Kettle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Fish, a pretty Kettle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A Kettle!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was a naughty Boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a naughty Boy was he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ran away to Scotland</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The people for to see⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Then he found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was as hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That a yard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was as long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That a song</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was as merry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That a cherry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was as red⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was as weighty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That fourscore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was as eighty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That a door</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was as wooden</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As in England⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So he stood in his shoes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And he wonder’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He wonder’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He stood in his shoes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And he wonder’d.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-visiting-the-tomb-of-burns" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Visiting the Tomb of Burns</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The Town, the churchyard, and the setting sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Clouds, the trees, the rounded hills all seem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though beautiful, cold⁠—strange⁠—as in a dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dreamed long ago, now new begun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The short lived, paly Summer is but won</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Winter’s ague, for one hour’s gleam;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though sapphire-warm, their Stars do never beam:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All is cold Beauty; pain is never done:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For who has mind to relish, Minos-wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Real of Beauty, free from that dead hue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Sickly imagination and sick pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cast wan upon it! Burns! with honour due</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I oft have honour’d thee. Great shadow, hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy face; I sin against thy native skies.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="meg-merrilies" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Meg Merrilies</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Old Meg she was a Gipsy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And liv’d upon the Moors:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her bed it was the brown heath turf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And her house was out of doors.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her apples were swart blackberries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her currants pods o’ broom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her wine was dew of the wild white rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her book a churchyard tomb.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her Brothers were the craggy hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her Sisters larchen trees⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone with her great family</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She liv’d as she did please.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No breakfast had she many a morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No dinner many a noon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’stead of supper she would stare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full hard against the Moon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But every morn of woodbine fresh</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She made her garlanding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every night the dark glen Yew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She wove, and she would sing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And with her fingers old and brown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She plaited Mats o’ Rushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave them to the Cottagers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She met among the Bushes,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Old Meg was brave as Margaret Queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tall as Amazon:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old red blanket coat she wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A chip hat had she on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God rest her aged bones somewhere⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She died full long agone!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-ailsa-rock" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Ailsa Rock</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Hearken, thou craggy ocean pyramid!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give answer from thy voice, the sea-fowls’ screams!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When were thy shoulders mantled in huge streams?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, from the sun, was thy broad forehead hid?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How long is ’t since the mighty power bid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thee heave to airy sleep from fathom dreams?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sleep in the lap of thunder or sunbeams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when gray clouds are thy cold coverlid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou answer’st not; for thou art dead asleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy life is but two dead eternities⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last in air, the former in the deep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First with the whales, last with the eagle-skies⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drown’d wast thou till an earthquake made thee steep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another cannot wake thy giant size.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="written-in-the-cottage-where-burns-was-born" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Written in the Cottage Where Burns Was Born</h2>
			<p>
				<span>This mortal body of a thousand days</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now fills, O Burns, a space in thine own room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thou didst dream alone on budded bays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Happy and thoughtless of thy day of doom!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My pulse is warm with thine old Barley-bree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My head is light with pledging a great soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My eyes are wandering, and I cannot see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fancy is dead and drunken at its goal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet can I stamp my foot upon thy floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet can I ope thy window-sash to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The meadow thou hast tramped o’er and o’er,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet can I think of thee till thought is blind,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet can I gulp a bumper to thy name,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O smile among the shades, for this is fame!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lines-written-in-the-highlands-after-a-visit-to-burnss-country" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lines Written in the Highlands After a Visit to Burns’s Country</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There is a charm in footing slow across a silent plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where patriot battle has been fought, where glory had the gain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a pleasure on the heath where Druids old have been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where mantles gray have rustled by and swept the nettles green;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is Joy in every spot made known by times of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New to the feet, although each tale a hundred times be told;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a deeper Joy than all, more solemn in the heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More parching to the tongue than all, of more divine a smart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When weary steps forget themselves upon a pleasant turf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon hot sand, or flinty road, or sea-shore iron scurf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward the Castle or the Cot, where long ago was born</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One who was great through mortal days, and died of fame unshorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light heather-bells may tremble then, but they are far away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wood-lark may sing from sandy fern,⁠—the Sun may hear his Lay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Runnels may kiss the grass on shelves and shallows clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But their low voices are not heard, though come on travels drear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood-red the sun may set behind black mountain peaks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue tides may sluice and drench their time in Caves and weedy creeks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eagles may seem to sleep wing-wide upon the Air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ring-doves may fly convuls’d across to some high-cedar’d lair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the forgotten eye is still fast lidded to the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Palmer’s, that with weariness, mid-desert shrine hath found.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">At such a time the soul’s a child, in childhood is the brain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgotten is the worldly heart⁠—alone, it heats in vain.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aye, if a Madman could have leave to pass a healthful day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell his forehead’s swoon and faint when first began decay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He might make tremble many a one whose spirit had gone forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find a Bard’s low cradle-place about the silent North.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scanty the hour and few the steps beyond the bourn of Care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the sweet and bitter world,⁠—beyond it unaware!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scanty the hour and few the steps, because a longer stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would bar return, and make a man forget his mortal way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O horrible! to lose the sight of well remember’d face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Brother’s eyes, of Sister’s brow⁠—constant to every place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filling the Air, as on we move, with Portraiture intense;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More warm than those heroic tints that pain a Painter’s sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When shapes of old come striding by, and visages of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Locks shining black, hair scanty gray, and passions manifold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, no, that horror cannot be, for at the cable’s length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man feels the gentle anchor pull and gladdens in its strength:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One hour, half-idiot, he stands by mossy water-fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in the very next he reads his soul’s Memorial:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He reads it on the mountain’s height, where chance he may sit down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon rough marble diadem⁠—that hill’s eternal Crown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet be his Anchor e’er so fast, room is there for a prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That man may never lose his Mind on Mountains black and bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he may stray league after league some great birthplace to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And keep his vision clear from speck, his inward sight unblind.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="at-fingals-cave" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">At Fingal’s Cave</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Not Aladdin magian</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever such a work began;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the wizard of the Dee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever such a dream could see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not <abbr>St.</abbr> John, in Patmos’ isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the passion of his toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he saw the churches seven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden aisled, built up in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazed at such a rugged wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I stood its roofing under.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! I saw one sleeping there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the marble cold and bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the surges wash’d his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his garments white did beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drench’d about the sombre rocks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his neck his well-grown locks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifted dry above the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were upon the curl again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What is this? and what art thou?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whisper’d I, and touch’d his brow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What art thou? and what is this?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whisper’d I, and strove to kiss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spirit’s hand, to wake his eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up he started in a trice:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I am Lycidas,” said he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Famed in funeral minstrelsy!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was architectured thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the great Oceanus!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here his mighty waters play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hollow organs all the day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, by turns, his dolphins all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finny palmers, great and small,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come to pay devotion due,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each a mouth of pearls must strew!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many a mortal of these days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dares to pass our sacred ways;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dares to touch, audaciously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This cathedral of the sea!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have been the pontiff-priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the waters never rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where a fledgy sea-bird choir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soars for ever! Holy fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have hid from mortal man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proteus is my Sacristan!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the dulled eye of mortal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath pass’d beyond the rocky portal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So for ever will I leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such a taint, and soon unweave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the magic of the place.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So saying, with a Spirit’s glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He dived!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="written-upon-the-top-of-ben-nevis" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Written Upon the Top of Ben Nevis</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Read me a lesson, Muse, and speak it loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the top of Nevis, blind in mist!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I look into the chasms, and a shroud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vaporous doth hide them,⁠—just so much wist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mankind do know of hell; I look o’erhead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And there is sullen mist,⁠—even so much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mankind can tell of heaven; mist is spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the earth, beneath me,⁠—even such,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so vague is man’s sight of himself!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here are the craggy stones beneath my feet,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus much I know that, a poor witless elf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I tread on them,⁠—that all my eye doth meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is mist and crag, not only on this height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in the world of thought and mental might!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-gadfly" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Gadfly</h2>
			<p>
				<span>All gentle folks who owe a grudge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To any living thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open your ears and stay your trudge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whilst I in dudgeon sing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Gadfly he hath stung me sore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O may he ne’er sting you!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we have many a horrid bore,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He may sting black and blue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Has any here an old gray Mare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With three legs all her store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O put it to her Buttocks bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And straight she’ll run on four.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Has any here a Lawyer suit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of 1743,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take Lawyer’s nose and put it to ’t</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And you the end will see.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Is there a Man in Parliament</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dumbfounder’d in his speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O let his neighbour make a rent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And put one in his breech.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O Lowther how much better thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hadst figur’d t’ other day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When to the folks thou mad’st a bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hadst no more to say.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If lucky Gadfly had but ta’en</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His seat …</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put thee to a little pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To save thee from a worse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Better than Southey it had been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better than <abbr>Mr.</abbr> D⁠⸺⁠</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better than Wordsworth, too, I ween,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Better than <abbr>Mr.</abbr> V⁠⸺.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forgive me, pray, good people all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For deviating so⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In spirit sure I had a call⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now I on will go.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Has any here a daughter fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too fond of reading novels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too apt to fall in love with care</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And charming Mister Lovels,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O put a Gadfly to that thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She keeps so white and pert⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I mean the finger for the ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And it will breed a wort.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Has any here a pious spouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who seven times a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scolds as King David pray’d, to chouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And have her holy way⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O let a Gadfly’s little sting</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Persuade her sacred tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That noises are a common thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But that her bell has rung.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And as this is the summum bo-</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">num of all conquering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I leave “<i xml:lang="enm">withouten wordes mo</i>”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Gadfly’s little sting.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-thomas-keats" epub:type="z3998:poem" xml:lang="sco">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To Thomas Keats</h2>
				<p epub:type="z3998:introductory-note">Belantree (for Ballantree) <time datetime="1818-07-10">July 10 1818</time>.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! ken ye what I met the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Out oure the Mountains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A coming down by craggies gray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An mossie fountains⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah goud-hair’d Marie yeve I pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ane minute’s guessing⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that I met upon the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is past expressing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I stood where a rocky brig</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A torrent crosses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I spied upon a misty rig</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A troup o’ Horses⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as they trotted down the glen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I sped to meet them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see if I might know the Men</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To stop and greet them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First Willie on his sleek mare came</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At canting gallop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His long hair rustled like a flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On board a shallop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came his brother Rab and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Young Peggy’s Mither</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Peggy too⁠—adown the glen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They went togither⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw her wrappit in her hood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Frae wind and raining⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her cheek was flush wi’ timid blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Twixt growth and waning⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She turn’d her dazed eyes full oft</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For there her Brithers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came riding with her Bridegroom soft</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mony ithers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Tarn came up and eyed me quick</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With reddened cheek⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Braw Tom was daffed like a chick⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He couldna speak⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, Marie, they are all gane hame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through blustering weather</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An’ every heart is full on flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An’ light as feather.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! Marie, they are all gone hame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Frae happy wadding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whilst I⁠—Ah is it not a shame?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sad tears am shedding.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-hearing-the-bag-pipe-and-seeing-the-stranger-played-at-inverary" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On Hearing the Bag-Pipe and Seeing “The Stranger” Played at Inverary</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Of late two dainties were before me plac’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweet, holy, pure, sacred and innocent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the ninth sphere to me benignly sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Gods might know my own particular taste:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First the soft Bag-pipe mourn’d with zealous haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Stranger next with head on bosom bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sigh’d; rueful again the piteous Bag-pipe went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again the Stranger sighings fresh did waste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Bag-pipe, thou didst steal my heart away⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O Stranger, thou my nerves from Pipe didst charm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Bag-pipe thou didst re-assert thy sway⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Again thou. Stranger, gav’st me fresh alarm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! I could not choose. Ah! my poor heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mum chance art thou with both oblig’d to part.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="mrs-cameron-and-ben-nevis" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cameron and Ben Nevis</h2>
				<p class="explanation" epub:type="z3998:introductory-note">After all there was one <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cameron of 50 years of age and the fattest woman in all Inverness-shire who got up this Mountain some few years ago⁠—true she had her servants⁠—but then she had herself. She ought to have hired Sisyphus⁠—“Up the high hill he heaves a huge round⁠—<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cameron.” ’Tis said a little conversation took place between the mountain and the Lady. After taking a glass of Whisky as she was tolerably seated at ease she thus began⁠—</p>
			</header>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mrs. <abbr class="name">C.</abbr></b>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Upon my life Sir Nevis I am piqued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I have so far panted tugg’d and reek’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do an honor to your old bald pate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now am sitting on you just to bait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without your paying me one compliment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas, ’tis so with all, when our intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is plain, and in the eye of all Mankind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We fair ones show a preference, too blind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You Gentle man immediately turn tail⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me then my hapless fate bewail!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ungrateful Baldpate have I not disdain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pleasant Valleys⁠—have I not madbrain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deserted all my Pickles and preserves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My China closet too⁠—with wretched Nerves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To boot⁠—say, wretched ingrate, have I not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left my soft cushion chair and caudle pot?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis true I had no corns⁠—no! thank the fates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Shoemaker was always <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bates.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if not <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bates why I’m not old!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still dumb ungrateful Nevis⁠—still so cold!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<footer class="explanation">
				<p>Here the Lady took some more whisky and was putting even more to her lips when she dashed it to the Ground, for the Mountain began to grumble⁠—which continued for a few minutes before he thus began⁠—</p>
			</footer>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ben Nevis</b>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What whining bit of tongue and Mouth thus dares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disturb my slumber of a thousand years?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so long my sleep has been secure⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to be so awak’d I’ll not endure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh pain⁠—for since the Eagle’s earliest scream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve had a damn’d confounded ugly dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Nightmare sure. What! Madam, was it you?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It cannot be! My old eyes are not true!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Red-Crag, my Spectacles! Now let me see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good Heavens! Lady, how the gemini</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did you get here? O, I shall split my sides!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall earthquake⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mrs. <abbr class="name">C.</abbr></b>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Sweet Nevis do not quake, for though I love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your honest Countenance all things above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truly I should not like to be convey’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So far into your Bosom⁠—gentle Maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loves not too rough a treatment, gentle Sir⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pray thee be calm and do not quake nor stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, not a Stone, or I shall go in fits⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ben Nevis</b>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I must⁠—I shall⁠—I meet not such tit bits⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I meet not such sweet creatures every day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By my old nightcap night and day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must have one sweet Buss⁠—I must and shall!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Red Crag!⁠—What! Madam, can you then repent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the toil and vigour you have spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see Ben Nevis and to touch his nose?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Red Crag I say! O I must have them close!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Red Crag, there lies beneath my farthest toe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vein of Sulphur⁠—go, dear Red Crag, go⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rub your flinty back against it⁠—budge!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear Madam, I must kiss you, faith I must!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must embrace you with my dearest gust!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Block-head, d’ ye hear!⁠—Block-head, I’ll make her feel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There lies beneath my east leg’s northern heel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cave of young earth dragons;⁠—well my boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go thither quick and so complete my joy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take you a bundle of the largest pines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the sun on fiercest Phosphor shines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fire them and ram them in the Dragon’s nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then will the dragons fry and fizz their best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until ten thousand now no bigger than</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor alligators⁠—poor things of one span⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will each one swell to twice ten times the size</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of northern whale⁠—then for the tender prize⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moment then⁠—for then will Red Crag rub</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His flinty back⁠—and I shall kiss and snub</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And press my dainty morsel to my breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Block-head make haste!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">O Muses, weep the rest⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Lady fainted and he thought her dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So pulled the clouds again about his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went to sleep again; soon she was rous’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By her affrighted servants⁠—next day, hous’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Safe on the lowly ground she bless’d her fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fainting fit was not delayed too late.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<footer class="explanation">
				<p>But what surprised me above all is how the lady got down again. I felt it horribly. ’Twas the most vile descent⁠—shook me all to pieces.</p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="translation-from-a-sonnet-of-ronsard" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Translation from a Sonnet of Ronsard</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Nature withheld Cassandra in the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For more adornment, a full thousand years;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She took their cream of Beauty’s fairest dyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shaped and tinted her above all Peers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile Love kept her dearly with his wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And underneath their shadow fill’d her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such a richness that the cloudy Kings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of high Olympus utter’d slavish sighs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When from the Heavens I saw her first descend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My heart took fire, and only burning pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were my pleasures⁠—they my Life’s sad end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love pour’d her beauty into my warm veins.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-prophecy-to-george-keats-in-america" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>A Prophecy</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">To George Keats in America</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis the witching time of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orbed is the moon and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Stars they glisten, glisten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeming with bright eyes to listen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what listen they?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a song and for a charm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See they glisten in alarm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Moon is waxing warm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hear what I shall say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moon! keep wide thy golden ears⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearken, Stars! and hearken, Spheres!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearken, thou eternal Sky!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sing an infant’s Lullaby,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O pretty lullaby!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen, listen, listen, listen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glisten, glisten, glisten, glisten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hear my Lullaby!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the Rushes, that will make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its cradle, still are in the lake⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the linen that will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its swathe, is on the cotton tree⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the woollen that will keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It warm, is on the silly sheep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen, Starlight, listen, listen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glisten, glisten, glisten, glisten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hear my lullaby!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Child, I see thee! Child, I’ve found thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Midst of the quiet all around thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Child, I see thee! Child, I spy thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy mother sweet is nigh thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Child, I know thee! Child no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a Poet evermore!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See, see, the Lyre, the Lyre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a flame of fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the little cradle’s top</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flaring, flaring, flaring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past the eyesight’s bearing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awake it from its sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see if it can keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its eyes upon the blaze⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amaze, amaze!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It stares, it stares, it stares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It dares what no one dares!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It lifts its little hand into the flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unharm’d, and on the strings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paddles a little tune, and sings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With dumb endeavour sweetly⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bard art thou completely!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Little child</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’ th’ western wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bard art thou completely!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweetly with dumb endeavour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A poet now or never,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Little child</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O’ th’ western wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Poet now or never!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Song</span>
				<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">I Had a Dove</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I had a dove and the sweet dove died;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I have thought it died of grieving:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, what could it grieve for? Its feet were tied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a silken thread of my own hand’s weaving;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet little red feet! why should you die⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should you leave me, sweet bird! why?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You lived alone in the forest-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why, pretty thing! would you not live with me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I kiss’d you oft and gave you white peas;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why not live sweetly, as in the green trees?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="fancy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Fancy</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Ever let the Fancy roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleasure never is at home:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At a touch sweet Pleasure melteth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to bubbles when rain pelteth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let winged Fancy wander</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the thought still spread beyond her:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open wide the mind’s cage-door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She’ll dart forth, and cloudward soar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O sweet Fancy! let her loose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Summer’s joys are spoilt by use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the enjoying of the Spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fades as does its blossoming;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Autumn’s red-lipp’d fruitage too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blushing through the mist and dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cloys with tasting: What do then?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit thee by the ingle, when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sear faggot blazes bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit of a winter’s night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the soundless earth is muffled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the caked snow is shuffled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the ploughboy’s heavy shoon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the Night doth meet the Noon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a dark conspiracy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To banish Even from her sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit thee there, and send abroad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a mind self-overawed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fancy, high-commission’d:⁠—send her!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She has vassals to attend her:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will bring, in spite of frost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauties that the earth hath lost;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will bring thee, all together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All delights of summer weather;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the buds and bells of May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From dewy sward or thorny spray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the heaped Autumn’s wealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a still, mysterious stealth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will mix these pleasures up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like three fit wines in a cup,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou shalt quaff it:⁠—thou shalt hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distant harvest-carols clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rustle of the reaped corn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet birds antheming the morn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in the same moment⁠—hark!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis the early April lark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the rooks, with busy caw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foraging for sticks and straw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt, at one glance, behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daisy and the marigold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White-plumed lilies, and the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hedge-grown primrose that hath burst;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaded hyacinth, alway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sapphire queen of the mid-May;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every leaf, and every flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pearled with the self-same shower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt see the field-mouse peep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meagre from its celled sleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the snake all winter-thin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast on sunny bank its skin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freckled nest-eggs thou shalt see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hatching in the hawthorn-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the hen-bird’s wing doth rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quiet on her mossy nest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the hurry and alarm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the bee-hive casts its swarm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Acorns ripe down-pattering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the autumn breezes sing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Oh, sweet Fancy! let her loose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everything is spoilt by use;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where’s the cheek that doth not fade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too much gazed at? Where’s the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose lip mature is ever new?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheres the eye, however blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does not weary? Where’s the face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One would meet in every place?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where’s the voice, however soft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One would hear so very oft?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At a touch sweet Pleasure melteth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to bubbles when rain pelteth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let, then, winged Fancy find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee a mistress to thy mind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dulcet-eyed as Ceres’ daughter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the God of Torment taught her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to frown and how to chide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a waist and with a side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White as Hebe’s, when her zone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slipt its golden clasp, and down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell her kirtle to her feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While she held the goblet sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Jove grew languid.⁠—Break the mesh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Fancy’s silken leash;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly break her prison-string.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such joys as these she’ll bring.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the winged Fancy roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleasure never is at home.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ode" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Ode</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Bards of Passion and of Mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye have left your souls on earth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have ye souls in heaven too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Double-lived in regions new?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes, and those of heaven commune</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the spheres of sun and moon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the noise of fountains wond’rous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the parle of voices thund’rous;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the whisper of heaven’s trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one another, in soft ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seated on Elysian lawns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Browsed by none but Dian’s fawns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath large blue-bells tented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the daisies are rose-scented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the rose herself has got</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perfume which on earth is not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the nightingale doth sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not a senseless, tranced thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But divine melodious truth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Philosophic numbers smooth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tales and golden histories</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heaven and its mysteries.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thus ye live on high, and then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the earth ye live again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the souls ye left behind you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teach us, here, the way to find you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where your other souls are joying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never slumber’d, never cloying.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, your earth-born souls still speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mortals, of their little week;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their sorrows and delights;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their passions and their spites;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their glory and their shame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What doth strengthen and what maim.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus ye teach us, every day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wisdom, though fled far away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Bards of Passion and of Mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye have left your souls on earth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye have souls in heaven too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Double-lived in regions new!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="modern-love" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Modern Love</h2>
			<p>
				<span>And what is love? It is a doll dress’d up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For idleness to cosset, nurse, and dandle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thing of soft misnomers, so divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That silly youth doth think to make itself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Divine by loving, and so goes on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yawning and doting a whole summer long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Miss’s comb is made a pearl tiara,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And common Wellingtons turn Romeo boots;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Cleopatra lives at number seven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Antony resides in Brunswick Square.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fools! if some passions high have warm’d the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Queens and Soldiers have play’d deep for hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is no reason why such agonies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should be more common than the growth of weeds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fools! make me whole again that weighty pearl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Queen of Egypt melted, and I’ll say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye may love in spite of beaver hats.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="fragment-of-the-castle-builder" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Fragment of “The Castle Builder”</h2>
			<p>
				<span>To-night I’ll have my friar⁠—let me think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About my room⁠—I’ll have it in the pink;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It should be rich and sombre, and the moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just in its mid-life in the midst of June</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should look thro’ four large windows and display</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear, but for gold-fish vases in the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their glassy diamonding on Turkish floor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tapers keep aside, an hour and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see what else the moon alone can show;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the night-breeze doth softly let us know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My terrace is well bower’d with oranges.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the floor the dullest spirit sees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A guitar-ribband and a lady’s glove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside a crumple-leaved tale of love;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tambour-frame, with Venus sleeping there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All finish’d but some ringlets of her hair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A viol, bow-strings torn, cross-wise upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A glorious folio of Anacreon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A skull upon a mat of roses lying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ink’d purple with a song concerning dying;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An hour-glass on the turn, amid the trails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of passion-flower;⁠—just in time there sails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cloud across the moon,⁠—the lights bring in!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see what more my phantasy can win.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a gorgeous room, but somewhat sad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The draperies are so, as tho’ they had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been made for Cleopatra’s winding-sheet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And opposite the stedfast eye doth meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spacious looking-glass, upon whose face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In letters raven-sombre, you may trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old “Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greek busts and statuary have ever been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held, by the finest spirits, fitter far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than vase grotesque and Siamesian jar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore ’tis sure a want of Attic taste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I should rather love a Gothic waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of eyesight on cinque-coloured potter’s clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than on the marble fairness of old Greece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My table-coverlits of Jason’s fleece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And black Numidian sheep-wool should be wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold, black, and heavy, from the Lama brought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My ebon sofas should delicious be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With down from Leda’s cygnet progeny.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My pictures all Salvator’s, save a few</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Titian’s portraiture, and one, though new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Haydon’s in its fresh magnificence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My wine⁠—O good! ’tis here at my desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I must sit to supper with my friar.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Song</span>
					<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Spirit Here That Reignest!</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="z3998:introductory-note">Written on a blank page in Beaumont and Fletcher’s works, between “<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Cupid’s Revenge</i>” and “<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Two Noble Kinsmen</i>”</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Spirit here that reignest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit here that painest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit here that burnest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit here that mournest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Spirit, I bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">My forehead low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enshaded with thy pinions.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Spirit, I look</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">All passion-struck</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into thy pale dominions.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Spirit here that laughest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit here that quaffest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit here that dancest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noble soul that prancest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Spirit, with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I join in the glee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A-nudging the elbow of Momus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Spirit, I flush</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With a Bacchanal blush</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Just fresh from the Banquet of Comus.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="spenserian-stanza" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Spenserian Stanza</h2>
				<p epub:type="z3998:introductory-note">Written at the close of Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Faerie Queene</i></p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">In after-time, a sage of mickle lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yclep’d Typographus, the Giant took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And did refit his limbs as heretofore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made him read in many a learned book,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And into many a lively legend look;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thereby in goodly themes so training him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That all his brutishness he quite forsook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When, meeting Artegall and Talus grim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one he struck stone-blind, the other’s eyes wox dim.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hyperion" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Hyperion</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">A Fragment</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="hyperion-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h3>
				<p>
					<span>Deep in the shady sadness of a vale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far sunken from the healthy breath of morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the fiery noon, and eve’s one star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat gray-hair’d Saturn, quiet as a stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still as the silence round about his lair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forest on forest hung about his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like cloud on cloud. No stir of air was there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not so much life as on a summer’s day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Robs not one light seed from the feather’d grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But where the dead leaf fell, there did it rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stream went voiceless by, still deadened more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By reason of his fallen divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spreading a shade: the Naiad ’mid her reeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press’d her cold finger closer to her lips.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Along the margin-sand large foot-marks went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No further than to where his feet had stray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slept there since. Upon the sodden ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His old right hand lay nerveless, listless, dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unsceptred; and his realmless eyes were closed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While his bow’d head seem’d list’ning to the Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ancient mother, for some comfort yet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">It seem’d no force could wake him from his place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there came one, who with a kindred hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touch’d his wide shoulders, after bending low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With reverence, though to one who knew it not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was a Goddess of the infant world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By her in stature the tall Amazon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had stood a pigmy’s height: she would have ta’en</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles by the hair and bent his neck;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or with a finger stay’d Ixion’s wheel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her face was large as that of Memphian sphinx,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pedestal’d haply in a palace-court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When sages look’d to Egypt for their lore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But oh! how unlike marble was that face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How beautiful, if sorrow had not made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sorrow more beautiful than Beauty’s self.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a listening fear in her regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if calamity had but begun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the vanward clouds of evil days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had spent their malice, and the sullen rear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was with its stored thunder labouring up.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One hand she press’d upon that aching spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where beats the human heart, as if just there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though an immortal, she felt cruel pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other upon Saturn’s bended neck</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She laid, and to the level of his ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaning with parted lips, some words she spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In solemn tenour and deep organ tone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some mourning words, which in our feeble tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would come in these like accents; O how frail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that large utterance of the early gods!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Saturn, look up!⁠—though wherefore, poor old King?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have no comfort for thee, no not one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot say, ‘O wherefore sleepest thou?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For heaven is parted from thee, and the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knows thee not, thus afflicted, for a God;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ocean too, with all its solemn noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has from thy sceptre pass’d; and all the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is emptied of thine hoary majesty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy thunder, conscious of the new command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rumbles reluctant o’er our fallen house;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy sharp lightning in unpractised hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scorches and burns our once serene domain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O aching time! O moments big as years!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All as ye pass swell out the monstrous truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And press it so upon our weary griefs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That unbelief has not a space to breathe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saturn, sleep on:⁠—O thoughtless, why did I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus violate thy slumbrous solitude?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I ope thy melancholy eyes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saturn, sleep on! while at thy feet I weep.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As when, upon a tranced summer-night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those green-robed senators of mighty woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tall oaks, branch-charmed by the earnest stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dream, and so dream all night without a stir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save from one gradual solitary gust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which comes upon the silence, and dies off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the ebbing air had but one wave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So came these words and went; the while in tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She touch’d her fair large forehead to the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just where her falling hair might be outspread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A soft and silken mat for Saturn’s feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One moon, with alteration slow, had shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her silver seasons four upon the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still these two were postured motionless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like natural sculpture in cathedral cavern;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The frozen God still couchant on the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sad Goddess weeping at his feet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until at length old Saturn lifted up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His faded eyes, and saw his kingdom gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the gloom and sorrow of the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that fair kneeling Goddess; and then spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As with a palsied tongue, and while his beard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shook horrid with such aspen-malady:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O tender spouse of gold Hyperion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thea, I feel thee ere I see thy face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look up, and let me see our doom in it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look up, and tell me if this feeble shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is Saturn’s; tell me, if thou hear’st the voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Saturn; tell me, if this wrinkling brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naked and bare of its great diadem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peers like the front of Saturn. Who had power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make me desolate? whence came the strength?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How was it nurtured to such bursting forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Fate seem’d strangled in my nervous grasp?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it is so; and I am smother’d up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And buried from all godlike exercise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of influence benign on planets pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of admonitions to the winds and seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of peaceful sway above man’s harvesting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all those acts which Deity supreme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth ease its heart of love in.⁠—I am gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away from my own bosom: I have left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My strong identity, my real self,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somewhere between the throne, and where I sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here on this spot of earth. Search, Thea, search!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open thine eyes eterne, and sphere them round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon all space: space starr’d, and lorn of light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Space region’d with life-air, and barren void;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spaces of fire, and all the yawn of hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Search, Thea, search! and tell me if thou seest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A certain shape or shadow, making way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wings or chariot fierce to repossess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A heaven he lost erewhile: it must⁠—it must</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be of ripe progress⁠—Saturn must be King.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, there must be a golden victory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There must be Gods thrown down, and trumpets blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of triumph calm, and hymns of festival</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the gold clouds metropolitan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voices of soft proclaim, and silver stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of strings in hollow shells; and there shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful things made new, for the surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the sky-children; I will give command:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thea! Thea! Thea! where is Saturn!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">This passion lifted him upon his feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made his hands to struggle in the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Druid locks to shake and ooze with sweat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes to fever out, his voice to cease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stood, and heard not Thea’s sobbing deep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little time, and then again he snatch’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Utterance thus:⁠—“But cannot I create?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cannot I form? Cannot I fashion forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another world, another universe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To overbear and crumble this to nought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is another chaos? Where?”⁠—That word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found way unto Olympus, and made quake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rebel three.⁠—Thea was startled up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her bearing was a sort of hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thus she quick-voiced spake, yet full of awe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“This cheers our fallen house: come to our friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Saturn! come away, and give them heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know the covert, for thence came I hither.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus brief; then with beseeching eyes she went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With backward footing through the shade a space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He follow’d, and she turn’d to lead the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through aged boughs, that yielded like the mist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which eagles cleave upmounting from their nest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Meanwhile in other realms big tears were shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More sorrow like to this, and such like woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too huge for mortal tongue or pen of scribe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Titans fierce, self-hid, or prison-bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groan’d for the old allegiance once more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And listen’d in sharp pain for Saturn’s voice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one of the whole mammoth-brood still kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sov’reignty, and rule, and majesty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blazing Hyperion on his orbed fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still sat, still snuff’d the incense, teeming up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From man to the sun’s God; yet unsecure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as among us mortals omens drear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fright and perplex, so also shudder’d he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not at dog’s howl, or gloom-bird’s hated screech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the familiar visiting of one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the first toll of his passing-bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or prophesyings of the midnight lamp:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But horrors, portion’d to a giant nerve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft made Hyperion ache. His palace bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bastion’d with pyramids of glowing gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And touch’d with shade of bronzed obelisks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glared a blood-red through all its thousand courts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arches, and domes, and fiery galleries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all its curtains of Aurorian clouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flush’d angerly: while sometimes eagles’ wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unseen before by Gods or wondering men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darken’d the place; and neighing steeds were heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not heard before by Gods or wondering men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also, when he would taste the spicy wreaths,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of incense breathed aloft from sacred hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of sweets, his ample palate took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Savour of poisonous brass and metal sick:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so, when harbour’d in the sleepy west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the full completion of fair day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For rest divine upon exalted couch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slumber in the arms of melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He paced away the pleasant hours of ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With stride colossal, on from hall to hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While far within each aisle and deep recess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His winged minions in close clusters stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amazed and full of fear; like anxious men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who on wide plains gather in panting troops,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When earthquakes jar their battlements and towers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even now while Saturn, roused from icy trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went step for step with Thea through the woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyperion, leaving twilight in the rear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came slope upon the threshold of the west;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, as was wont, his palace-door flew ope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In smoothest silence, save what solemn tubes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blown by the serious Zephyrs, gave of sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wandering sounds, slow-breathed melodies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like a rose in vermeil tint and shape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fragrance soft, and coolness to the eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That inlet to severe magnificence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood full blown, for the God to enter in.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He enter’d, but he enter’d full of wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His flaming robes stream’d out beyond his heels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave a roar, as if of earthly fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That scared away the meek ethereal Hours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made their dove-wings tremble. On he flared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From stately nave to nave, from vault to vault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through bowers of fragrant and enwreathed light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And diamond-paved lustrous long arcades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until he reach’d the great main cupola;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There standing fierce beneath, he stampt his foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the basements deep to the high towers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jarr’d his own golden region: and before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The quavering thunder thereupon had ceased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His voice leapt out, despite of godlike curb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To this result: “O dreams of day and night!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O monstrous forms! O effigies of pain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O spectres busy in a cold, cold gloom!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O lank-ear’d Phantoms of black-weeded pools!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why do I know ye? why have I seen ye! why</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is my eternal essence thus distraught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see and to behold these horrors new?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saturn is fallen, am I too to fall?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am I to leave this haven of my rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This cradle of my glory, this soft clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This calm luxuriance of blissful light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These crystalline pavilions, and pure fanes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all my lucent empire? It is left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deserted, void, nor any haunt of mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blaze, the splendour, and the symmetry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot see⁠—but darkness, death and darkness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even here, into my centre of repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shady visions come to domineer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Insult, and blind, and stifle up my pomp.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall!⁠—No, by Tellus and her briny robes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the fiery frontier of my realms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will advance a terrible right arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall scare that infant thunderer, rebel Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bid old Saturn take his throne again.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spake, and ceased, the while a heavier threat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Held struggle with his throat, but came not forth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as in theatres of crowded men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hubbub increases more they call out, “Hush!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So at Hyperion’s words the Phantoms pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bestirr’d themselves, thrice horrible and cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the mirror’d level where he stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mist arose, as from a scummy marsh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this, through all his bulk an agony</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crept gradual, from the feet unto the crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a lithe serpent vast and muscular</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making slow way, with head and neck convulsed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From over-strained might. Released, he fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the eastern gates, and full six dewy hours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the dawn in season due should blush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He breathed fierce breath against the sleepy portals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clear’d them of heavy vapours, burst them wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suddenly on the ocean’s chilly streams.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The planet orb of fire, whereon he rode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each day from east to west the heavens through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spun round in sable curtaining of clouds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not therefore veiled quite, blindfold, and hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ever and anon the glancing spheres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Circles, and arcs, and broad-belting colure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glow’d through, and wrought upon the muffling dark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet-shaped lightnings from the nadir deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to the zenith,⁠—hieroglyphics old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which sages and keen-eyed astrologers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then living on the earth, with labouring thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Won from the gaze of many centuries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now lost, save what we find on remnants huge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of stone, or marble swart; their import gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their wisdom long since fled.⁠—Two wings this orb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possess’d for glory, two fair argent wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever exalted at the God’s approach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now, from forth the gloom their plumes immense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose, one by one, till all outspreaded were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While still the dazzling globe maintain’d eclipse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awaiting for Hyperion’s command.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fain would he have commanded, fain took throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bid the day begin, if but for change.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He might not:⁠—No, though a primeval God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sacred seasons might not be disturb’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore the operations of the dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stay’d in their birth, even as here ’tis told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those silver wings expanded sisterly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eager to sail their orb; the porches wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open’d upon the dusk demesnes of night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the bright Titan, phrenzied with new woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unused to bend, by hard compulsion bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spirit to the sorrow of the time:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all along a dismal rack of clouds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the boundaries of day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stretch’d himself in grief and radiance faint.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There as he lay, the Heaven with its stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look’d down on him with pity, and the voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Cœlus, from the universal space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus whisper’d low and solemn in his ear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O brightest of my children dear, earth-born</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sky-engendered. Son of Mysteries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All unrevealed even to the powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which met at thy creating; at whose joys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And palpitations sweet, and pleasures soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, Coelus, wonder, how they came and whence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the fruits thereof what shapes they be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distinct, and visible; symbols divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Manifestations of that beauteous life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diffused unseen throughout eternal space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these new-form’d art thou, oh brightest child!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these, thy brethren and the Goddesses!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is sad feud among ye, and rebellion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of son against his sire. I saw him fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw my first-born tumbled from his throne!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me his arms were spread, to me his voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found way from forth the thunders round his head!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pale wox I, and in vapours hid my face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou, too, near such doom? vague fear there is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I have seen my sons most unlike Gods.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divine ye were created, and divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sad demeanour, solemn, undisturb’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unruffled, like high Gods, ye lived and ruled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I behold in you fear, hope, and wrath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Actions of rage and passion; even as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see them, on the mortal world beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In men who die.⁠—This is the grief, O Son!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad sign of ruin, sudden dismay, and fall!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet do thou strive; as thou art capable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou canst move about, an evident God;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And canst oppose to each malignant hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ethereal presence:⁠—I am but a voice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My life is but the life of winds and tides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more than winds and tides can I avail:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou canst.⁠—Be thou therefore in the van</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of circumstance; yea, seize the arrow’s barb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the tense string murmur.⁠—To the earth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there thou wilt find Saturn, and his woes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime I will keep watch on thy bright sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of thy seasons be a careful nurse.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere half this region-whisper had come down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyperion arose, and on the stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifted his curved lids, and kept them wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until it ceased; and still he kept them wide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still they were the same bright, patient stars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with a slow incline of his broad breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to a diver in the pearly seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forward he stoop’d over the airy shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plunged all noiseless into the deep night.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="hyperion-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h3>
				<p>
					<span>Just at the self-same beat of Time’s wide wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyperion slid into the rustled air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Saturn gain’d with Thea that sad place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Cybele and the bruised Titans mourn’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a den where no insulting light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could glimmer on their tears; where their own groans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They felt, but heard not, for the solid roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thunderous waterfalls and torrents hoarse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pouring a constant bulk, uncertain where.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crag jutting forth to crag, and rocks that seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever as if just rising from a sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forehead to forehead held their monstrous horns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus in thousand hugest phantasies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made a fit roofing to this nest of woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of thrones, hard flint they sat upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Couches of rugged stone, and slaty ridge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stubborn’d with iron. All were not assembled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some chain’d in torture, and some wandering.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cœus, and Gyges, and Briarcüs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Typhon, and Dolor, and Porphyrion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many more, the brawniest in assault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were pent in regions of laborious breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dungeon’d in opaque element to keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their clenched teeth still clench’d, and all their limbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lock’d up like veins of metal, crampt and screw’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a motion, save of their big hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaving in pain, and horribly convulsed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sanguine, feverous, boiling gurge of pulse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mnemosyne was straying in the world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from her moon had Phœbe wandered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many else were free to roam abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for the main, here found they covert drear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce images of life, one here, one there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay vast and edgeways; like a dismal cirque</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Druid stones, upon a forlorn moor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the chill rain begins at shut of eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dull November, and their chancel vault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Heaven itself, is blinded throughout night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each one kept shroud, nor to his neighbour gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or word, or look, or action of despair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Creüs was one; his ponderous iron mace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay by him, and a shatter’d rib of rock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Told of his rage, ere he thus sank and pined.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Iapetus another; in his grasp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A serpent’s plashy neck; its barbed tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Squeezed from the gorge, and all its uncurl’d length</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dead; and because the creature could not spit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its poison in the eyes of conquering Jove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next Cottus: prone he lay, chin uppermost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though in pain: for still upon the flint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ground severe his skull, with open mouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eyes at horrid working. Nearest him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asia, born of most enormous Caf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who cost her mother Tellus keener pangs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though feminine, than any of her sons:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More thought than woe was in her dusky face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she was prophesying of her glory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her wide imagination stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Palm-shaded temples, and high rival fanes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Oxus or in Ganges’ sacred isles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as Hope upon her anchor leans,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So leant she, not so fair, upon a tusk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shed from the broadest of her elephants.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above her, on a crag’s uneasy shelve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his elbow raised, all prostrate else,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shadow’d Enceladus; once tame and mild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As grazing ox unworried in the meads;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now tiger-passion’d, lion-thoughted, wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He meditated, plotted, and even now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was hurling mountains in that second war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not long delay’d, that scared the younger Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hide themselves in forms of beast and bird.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not far hence Atlas; and beside him prone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phorcus, the sire of Gorgons. Neighbour’d close</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oceanus, and Tethys, in whose lap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sobb’d Clymene among her tangled hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In midst of all lay Themis, at the feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ops the queen all clouded round from sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No shape distinguishable, more than when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thick night confounds the pine-tops with the clouds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many else whose names may not be told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when the Muse’s wings are air-ward spread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who shall delay her flight? And she must chant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Saturn, and his guide, who now had climb’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With damp and slippery footing from a depth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More horrid still. Above a sombre cliff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their heads appear’d, and up their stature grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till on the level height their steps found ease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Thea spread abroad her trembling arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the precincts of this nest of pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And side-long fix’d her eye on Saturn’s face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There saw she direst strife; the supreme God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At war with all the frailty of grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rage, of fear, anxiety, revenge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remorse, spleen, hope, but most of all despair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against these plagues he strove in vain: for Fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had pour’d a mortal oil upon his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A disanointing poison: so that Thea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affrighted, kept her still, and let him pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First onwards in, among the fallen tribe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As with us mortal men, the laden heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is persecuted more, and fever’d more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it is nighing to the mournful house</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where other hearts are sick of the same bruise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Saturn, as he walk’d into the midst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt faint, and would have sunk among the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that he met Enceladus’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose mightiness, and awe of him, at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came like an inspiration; and he shouted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Titans, behold your God!” at which some groan’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some started on their feet; some also shouted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some wept, some wail’d⁠—all bow’d with reverence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Ops, uplifting her black folded veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show’d her pale cheeks, and all her forehead wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyebrows thin and jet, and hollow eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a roaring in the bleak-grown pines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Winter lifts his voice; there is a noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among immortals when a God gives sign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hushing finger, how he means to load</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tongue with the full weight of utterless thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thunder, and with music, and with pomp:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such noise is like the roar of bleak-grown pines;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, when it ceases in this mountain’d world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No other sound succeeds; but ceasing here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among these fallen, Saturn’s voice therefrom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew up like organ, that begins anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its strain, when other harmonies, stopt short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave the dinn’d air vibrating silverly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus grew it up:⁠—“Not in my own sad breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is its own great judge and searcher out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can I find reason why ye should be thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not in the legends of the first of days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Studied from that old spirit-leaved book</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which starry Uranus with finger bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saved from the shores of darkness, when the waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Low-ebb’d still hid it up in shallow gloom;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the which book ye know I ever kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my firm-based footstool:⁠—Ah, infirm!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not there, nor in sign, symbol, or portent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of element, earth, water, air, and fire,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At war, at peace, or inter-quarrelling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One against one, or two, or three, or all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each several one against the other three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fire with air loud warring when rain-floods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drown both, and press them both against earth’s face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, finding sulphur, a quadruple wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unhinges the poor world;⁠—not in that strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefrom I take strange lore, and read it deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can I find reason why ye should be thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, nowhere can unriddle, though I search,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pore on nature’s universal scroll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even to swooning, why ye, Divinities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first-born of all shaped and palpable Gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should cower beneath what, in comparison,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is untremendous might. Yet ye are here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erwhelm’d, and spurn’d, and batter’d, ye are here!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Titans, shall I say ‘Arise!’⁠—Ye groan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I say ‘Crouch!’⁠—Ye groan. What can I then?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Heaven wide! O unseen parent dear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What can I? Tell me, all ye brethren Gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How we can war, how engine our great wrath!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O speak your counsel now, for Saturn’s ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is all a-hunger’d. Thou, Oceanus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ponderest high and deep; and in thy face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see, astonied, that severe content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which comes of thought and musing: give us help!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So ended Saturn; and the God of the Sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sophist and Sage, from no Athenian grove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But cogitation in his watery shades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arose, with locks not oozy, and began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In murmurs, which his first-endeavouring tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caught infant-like from the far-foamed sands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O ye, whom wrath consumes! who, passion-stung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writhe at defeat, and nurse your agonies!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shut up your senses, stifle up your ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My voice is not a bellows unto ire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet listen, ye who will, whilst I bring proof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How ye, perforce, must be content to stoop;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the proof much comfort will I give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ye will take that comfort in its truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We fall by course of Nature’s law, not force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thunder, or of Jove. Great Saturn, thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has sifted well the atom-universe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for this reason, that thou art the King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only blind from sheer supremacy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One avenue was shaded from thine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which I wander’d to eternal truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And first, as thou wast not the first of powers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So art thou not the last; it cannot be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art not the beginning nor the end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From chaos and parental darkness came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light, the first fruits of that intestine broil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sullen ferment, which for wondrous ends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was ripening in itself. The ripe hour came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with it light, and light engendering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon its own producer, forthwith touch’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whole enormous matter into life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon that very hour, our parentage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Heavens and the Earth, were manifest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thou first-born, and we the giant-race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found ourselves ruling new and beauteous realms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now comes the pain of truth, to whom ’tis pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O folly! for to bear all naked truths,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to envisage circumstance, all calm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is the top of sovereignty. Mark well!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Heaven and Earth are fairer, fairer far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Chaos and blank Darkness, though once chiefs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as we show beyond that Heaven and Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In form and shape compact and beautiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In will, in action free, companionship,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thousand other signs of purer life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So on our heels a fresh perfection treads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A power more strong in beauty, born of us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fated to excel us, as we pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In glory that old Darkness: nor are we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereby more conquer’d, than by us the rule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of shapeless Chaos. Say, doth the dull soil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quarrel with the proud forests it hath fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And feedeth still, more comely than itself?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can it deny the chiefdom of green groves?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or shall the tree be envious of the dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because it cooeth, and hath snowy wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wander wherewithal and find its joys?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are such forest-trees, and our fair boughs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have bred forth, not pale solitary doves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But eagles golden-feather’d, who do tower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above us in their beauty, and must reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In right thereof; for ’tis the eternal law</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That first in beauty should be first in might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, by that law, another race may drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our conquerors to mourn as we do now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have ye beheld the young God of the Seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My dispossessor? Have ye seen his face?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have ye beheld his chariot, foam’d along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By noble winged creatures he hath made?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw him on the calmed waters scud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a glow of beauty in his eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it enforced me to bid sad farewell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all my empire; farewell sad I took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hither came, to see how dolorous fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had wrought upon ye; and how I might best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give consolation in this woe extreme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive the truth and let it be your balm.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Whether through poz’d conviction, or disdain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They guarded silence, when Oceanus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left murmuring, what deepest thought can tell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But so it was, none answer’d for a space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save one whom none regarded, Clymene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet she answer’d not, only complain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hectic lips, and eyes up-looking mild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus wording timidly among the fierce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Father, I am here the simplest voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all my knowledge is that joy is gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this thing woe crept in among our hearts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There to remain forever, as I fear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would not bode of evil, if I thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So weak a creature could turn off the help</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which by just right should come of mighty Gods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet let me tell my sorrow, let me tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what I heard, and how it made me weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And know that we had parted from all hope.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I stood upon a shore, a pleasant shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where a sweet clime was breathed from a land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fragrance, quietness, and trees, and flowers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of calm joy it was, as I of grief;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too full of joy and soft delicious warmth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that I felt a movement in my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To chide, and to reproach that solitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With songs of misery, music of our woes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sat me down, and took a mouthed shell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And murmur’d into it, and made melody⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O melody no more! for while I sang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with poor skill let pass into the breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dull shell’s echo, from a bowery strand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just opposite, an island of the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There came enchantment with the shifting wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That did both drown and keep alive my ears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I threw my shell away upon the sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a wave fill’d it, as my sense was fill’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that new blissful golden melody.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A living death was in each gush of sounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each family of rapturous hurried notes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fell, one after one, yet all at once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like pearl beads dropping sudden from their string:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then another, then another strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each like a dove leaving its olive perch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With music wing’d instead of silent plumes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hover round my head, and make me sick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of joy and grief at once. Grief overcame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I was stopping up my frantic ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, past all hindrance of my trembling hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A voice came sweeter, sweeter than all tune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still it cried, ‘Apollo! young Apollo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The morning-bright Apollo! young Apollo!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fled, it follow’d me, and cried, ‘Apollo!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Father, and O Brethren, had ye felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those pains of mine; O Saturn, hadst thou felt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye would not call this too indulged tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presumptuous, in thus venturing to be heard.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So far her voice flow’d on, like timorous brook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, lingering along a pebbled coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth fear to meet the sea: but sea it met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shudder’d; for the overwhelming voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of huge Enceladus swallow’d it in wrath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ponderous syllables, like sullen waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the half-glutted hollows of reef-rocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came booming thus, while still upon his arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lean’d; not rising, from supreme contempt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Or shall we listen to the over-wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to the over-foolish giant, Gods?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not thunderbolt on thunderbolt, till all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That rebel Jove’s whole armoury were spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not world on world upon these shoulders piled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could agonize me more than baby-words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In midst of this dethronement horrible.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speak! roar! shout! yell! ye sleepy Titans all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do ye forget the blows, the buffets vile?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are ye not smitten by a youngling arm?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost thou forget, sham Monarch of the Waves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy scalding in the seas? What! have I roused</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your spleens with so few simple words as these?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O joy! for now I see ye are not lost:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O joy! for now I see a thousand eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wide-glaring for revenge.”⁠—As this he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lifted up his stature vast, and stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still without intermission speaking thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now ye are flames, I’ll tell you how to burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And purge the ether of our enemies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How to feed fierce the crooked stings of fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And singe away the swollen clouds of Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stifling that puny essence in its tent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let him feel the evil he hath done;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though I scorn Oceanus’s lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much pain have I for more than loss of realms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The days of peace and slumberous calm are fled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those days, all innocent of scathing war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all the fair Existences of heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came open-eyed to guess what we would speak:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was before our brows were taught to frown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before our lips knew else but solemn sounds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was before we knew the winged thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Victory, might be lost, or might be won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be ye mindful that Hyperion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our brightest brother, still is undisgraced⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyperion, lo! his radiance is here!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">All eyes were on Enceladus’s face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they beheld, while still Hyperion’s name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flew from his lips up to the vaulted rocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pallid gleam across his features stern:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not savage, for he saw full many a God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wroth as himself. He look’d upon them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in each face he saw a gleam of light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But splendider in Saturn’s, whose hoar locks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shone like the bubbling foam about a keel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the prow sweeps into a midnight cove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pale and silver silence they remain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till suddenly a splendour, like the morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pervaded all the beetling gloomy steeps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the sad spaces of oblivion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every gulf, and every chasm old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every height, and every sullen depth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voiceless, or hoarse with loud tormented streams:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the everlasting cataracts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the headlong torrents far and near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mantled before in darkness and huge shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now saw the light and made it terrible.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was Hyperion:⁠—a granite peak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bright feet touch’d, and there he stay’d to view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The misery his brilliance had betray’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the most hateful seeing of itself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Golden his hair of short Numidian curl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Regal his shape majestic, a vast shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In midst of his own brightness, like the bulk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Memnon’s image at the set of sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To one who travels from the dusking East:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighs, too, as mournful as that Memnon’s harp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He utter’d, while his hands contemplative</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He press’d together, and in silence stood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despondence seized again the fallen Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At sight of the dejected King of Day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many hid their faces from the light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fierce Enceladus sent forth his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the brotherhood; and, at their glare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uprose Iäpetus, and Creüs too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Phorcus, sea-born, and together strode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where he tower’d on his eminence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There those four shouted forth old Saturn’s name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyperion from the peak loud answered “Saturn!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saturn sat near the Mother of the Gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whose face was no joy, though all the Gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave from their hollow throats the name of “Saturn!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="hyperion-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thus in alternate uproar and sad peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amazed were those Titans utterly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O leave them, Muse! O leave them to their woes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou art weak to sing such tumults dire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A solitary sorrow best befits</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy lips, and antheming a lonely grief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave them, O Muse! for thou anon wilt find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many a fallen old Divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wandering in vain about bewildered shores.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime touch piously the Delphic harp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a wind of heaven but will breathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In aid soft warble from the Dorian flute;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For lo! ’tis for the Father of all verse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flush everything that hath a vermeil hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the rose glow intense and warm the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let the clouds of even and of morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Float in voluptuous fleeces o’er the hills;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the red wine within the goblet boil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cold as a bubbling well; let faint-lipp’d shells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On sands or in great deeps, vermilion turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all their labyrinths; and let the maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blush keenly, as with some warm kiss surprised.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chief isle of the embowered Cyclades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rejoice, O Delos, with thine olives green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And poplars, and lawn-shading palms, and beech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which the Zephyr breathes the loudest song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hazels thick, dark-stemm’d beneath the shade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo is once more the golden theme!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where was he, when the Giant of the Sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood bright, amid the sorrow of his peers?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together had he left his mother fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his twin-sister sleeping in their bower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the morning twilight wandered forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the osiers of a rivulet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full ankle-deep in lilies of the vale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nightingale had ceased, and a few stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were lingering in the heavens, while the thrush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began calm-throated. Throughout all the isle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no covert, no retired cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unhaunted by the murmurous noise of waves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though scarcely heard in many a green recess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He listen’d, and he wept, and his bright tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went trickling down the golden bow he held.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus with half-shut suffused eyes he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While from beneath some cumbrous boughs hard by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With solemn step an awful Goddess came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there was purport in her looks for him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he with eager guess began to read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perplex’d, the while melodiously he said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How cam’st thou over the unfooted sea?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hath that antique mien and robed form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moved in these vales invisible till now?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sure I have heard those vestments sweeping o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fallen leaves, when I have sat alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In cool mid-forest. Surely I have traced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rustle of those ample skirts about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These grassy solitudes, and seen the flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift up their heads, and still the whisper pass’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goddess! I have beheld those eyes before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their eternal calm, and all that face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or I have dream’d.”⁠—“Yes,” said the supreme shape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou hast dream’d of me; and awaking up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Didst find a lyre all golden by thy side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose strings touch’d by thy fingers, all the vast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwearied ear of the whole universe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Listen’d in pain and pleasure at the birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such new tuneful wonder. Is ’t not strange</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou shouldst weep, so gifted? Tell me, youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What sorrow thou canst feel; for I am sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou dost shed a tear: explain thy griefs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To one who in this lonely isle hath been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The watcher of thy sleep and hours of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the young day when first thy infant hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pluck’d witless the weak flowers, till thine arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could bend that bow heroic to all times.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show thy heart’s secret to an ancient Power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hath forsaken old and sacred thrones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For prophecies of thee, and for the sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of loveliness new-born.”⁠—Apollo then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sudden scrutiny and gloomless eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus answer’d, while his white melodious throat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throbb’d with the syllables:⁠—“Mnemosyne!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy name is on my tongue, I know not how;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I tell thee what thou so well seest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I strive to show what from thy lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would come no mystery? For me, dark, dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And painful vile oblivion seals my eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I strive to search wherefore I am so sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until a melancholy numbs my limbs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then upon the grass I sit, and moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one who once had wings.⁠—O why should I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feel cursed and thwarted, when the liegeless air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yields to my step aspirant? why should I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spurn the green turf as hateful to my feet?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goddess benign, point forth some unknown thing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are there not other regions than this isle?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What are the stars? There is the sun, the sun!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the most patient brilliance of the moon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stars by thousands! Point me out the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To any one particular beauteous star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will flit into it with my lyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make its silvery splendour pant with bliss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have heard the cloudy thunder: Where is power?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose hand, whose essence, what divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes this alarum in the elements,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I here idle listen on the shores</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fearless yet in aching ignorance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O tell me, lonely Goddess, by thy harp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That waileth every morn and eventide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me why thus I rave, about these groves!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mute thou remainest⁠—Mute! yet I can read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wondrous lesson in thy silent face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowledge enormous makes a God of me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Names, deeds, grey legends, dire events, rebellions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Majesties, sovran voices, agonies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Creations and destroyings, all at once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pour into the wide hollows of my brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deify me, as if some blithe wine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or bright elixir peerless I had drunk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so become immortal.”⁠—Thus the God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While his enkindled eyes, with level glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath his white soft temples, steadfast kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembling with light upon Mnemosyne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon wild commotions shook him, and made flush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the immortal fairness of his limbs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most like the struggle at the gate of death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or liker still to one who should take leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of pale immortal death, and with a pang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hot as death’s is chill, with fierce convulse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Die into life: so young Apollo anguish’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His very hair, his golden tresses famed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept undulation round his eager neck.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>During the pain Mnemosyne upheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her arms as one who prophesied.⁠—At length</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo shriek’d;⁠—and lo! from all his limbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Celestial …</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="the-eve-of-st-agnes" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Eve of <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes</h2>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes’ Eve⁠—Ah, bitter chill it was!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The owl, for all his feathers, was a-cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hare limp’d trembling through the frozen grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And silent was the flock in woolly fold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Numb were the Beadsman’s fingers, while he told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His rosary, and while his frosted breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like pious incense from a censer old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seem’d taking flight for heaven, without a death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past the sweet Virgin’s picture, while his prayer he saith.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">His prayer he saith, this patient, holy man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then takes his lamp, and riseth from his knees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And back returneth, meagre, barefoot, wan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the chapel aisle by slow degrees:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sculptured dead, on each side, seem to freeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emprison’d in black, purgatorial rails:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knights, ladies, praying in dumb orat’ries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He passeth by; and his weak spirit fails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think how they may ache in icy hoods and mails.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-3">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Northward he turneth through a little door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scarce three steps, ere Music’s golden tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flatter’d to tears this aged man and poor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But no⁠—already had his death-bell rung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The joys of all his life were said and sung:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His was harsh penance on <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes’ Eve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another way he went, and soon among</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rough ashes sat he for his soul’s reprieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all night kept awake, for sinners’ sake to grieve.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-4">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">That ancient Beadsman heard the prelude soft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so it chanced, for many a door was wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From hurry to and fro. Soon, up aloft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The silver, snarling trumpets ’gan to chide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The level chambers, ready with their pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were glowing to receive a thousand guests:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The carved angels, ever eager-eyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stared, where upon their heads the cornice rests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hair blown back, and wings put crosswise on their breasts.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-5">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">At length burst in the argent revelry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With plume, tiara, and all rich array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Numerous as shadows haunting fairily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The brain, new-stuff’d, in youth, with triumphs gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of old romance. These let us wish away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turn, sole-thoughted, to one Lady there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose heart had brooded, all that wintry day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On love, and wing’d <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes’ saintly care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As she had heard old dames full many times declare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-6">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">They told her how, upon <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes’ Eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Young virgins might have visions of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soft adorings from their loves receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the honey’d middle of the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If ceremonies due they did aright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As, supperless to bed they must retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And couch supine their beauties, lily white;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor look behind, nor sideways, but require</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Heaven with upward eyes for all that they desire.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-7">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Full of this whim was thoughtful Madeline:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The music, yearning like a God in pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She scarcely heard: her maiden eyes divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fix’d on the floor, saw many a sweeping train</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pass by⁠—she heeded not at all: in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came many a tiptoe, amorous cavalier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And back retired; not cool’d by high disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she saw not: her heart was otherwhere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sigh’d for Agnes’ dreams, the sweetest of the year.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-8">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She danced along with vague, regardless eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Anxious her lips, her breathing quick and short:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hallow’d hour was near at hand: she sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid the timbrels, and the throng’d resort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whisperers in anger, or in sport;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Mid looks of love, defiance, hate, and scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hoodwink’d with faery fancy; all amort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save to <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes and her lambs unshorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the bliss to be before to-morrow morn.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-9">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So, purposing each moment to retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She linger’d still. Meantime, across the moors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had come young Porphyro, with heart on fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Madeline. Beside the portal doors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Buttress’d from moonlight, stands he, and implores</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All saints to give him sight of Madeline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for one moment in the tedious hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he might gaze and worship all unseen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance speak, kneel, touch, kiss⁠—in sooth such things have been.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-10">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He ventures in: let no buzz’d whisper tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All eyes be muffled, or a hundred swords</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will storm his heart. Love’s fev’rous citadel:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him, those chambers held barbarian hordes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hyena foemen, and hot-blooded lords,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose very dogs would execrations howl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against his lineage: not one breast affords</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him any mercy, in that mansion foul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save one old beldame, weak in body and in soul.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-11">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Ah, happy chance! the aged creature came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shuffling along with ivory-headed wand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To where he stood, hid from the torch’s flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind a broad hall-pillar, far beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sound of merriment and chorus bland:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He startled her; but soon she knew his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grasp’d his fingers in her palsied hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, “Mercy, Porphyro! hie thee from this place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are all here to-night, the whole bloodthirsty race!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-12">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Get hence! get hence! there’s dwarfish Hildebrand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had a fever late, and in the fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cursed thee and thine, both house and land:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then there’s that old Lord Maurice, not a whit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More tame for his gray hairs⁠—Alas me! flit!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flit like a ghost away.”⁠—“Ah, Gossip dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We’re safe enough; here in this armchair sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell me how”⁠—“Good Saints! not here, not here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow me, child, or else these stones will be thy bier.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-13">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He follow’d through a lowly arched way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brushing the cobwebs with his lofty plume;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as she mutter’d “Well-a⁠—well-a-day!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He found him in a little moonlight room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pale, latticed, chill, and silent as a tomb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Now tell me where is Madeline,” said he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O tell me, Angela, by the holy loom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which none but secret sisterhood may see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes’ wool are weaving piously.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-14">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“<abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes! Ah! it is <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes’ Eve⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet men will murder upon holy days:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou must hold water in a witch’s sieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And be liege-lord of all the Elves and Fays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To venture so: it fills me with amaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see thee, Porphyro!⁠—<abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes’ Eve!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God’s help! my lady fair the conjurer plays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This very night: good angels her deceive!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let me laugh awhile, I’ve mickle time to grieve.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-15">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Feebly she laugheth in the languid moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While Porphyro upon her face doth look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like puzzled urchin on an aged crone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who keepeth closed a wond’rous riddle-book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As spectacled she sits in chimney nook.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But soon his eyes grew brilliant, when she told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His lady’s purpose; and he scarce could brook</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tears, at the thought of those enchantments cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Madeline asleep in lap of legends old.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-16">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Sudden a thought came like a full-blown rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flushing his brow, and in his pained heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made purple riot: then doth he propose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A stratagem, that makes the beldame start:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“A cruel man and impious thou art:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet lady, let her pray, and sleep, and dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone with her good angels, far apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From wicked men like thee. Go, go! I deem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou canst not surely be the same that thou didst seem.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-17">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“I will not harm her, by all saints I swear,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quoth Porphyro: “O may I ne’er find grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When my weak voice shall whisper its last prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If one of her soft ringlets I displace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or look with ruffian passion in her face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good Angela, believe me by these tears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or I will, even in a moment’s space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awake, with horrid shout, my foemen’s ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beard them, though they be more fang’d than wolves and bears.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-18">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! why wilt thou affright a feeble soul?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A poor, weak, palsy-stricken, church-yard thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose passing-bell may ere the midnight toll;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose prayers for thee, each morn and evening,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were never miss’d.” Thus plaining, doth she bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentler speech from burning Porphyro;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So woful, and of such deep sorrowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Angela gives promise she will do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever he shall wish, betide her weal or woe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-19">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Which was, to lead him, in close secrecy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even to Madeline’s chamber, and there hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him in a closet, of such privacy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he might see her beauty unespied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And win perhaps that night a peerless bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While legion’d fairies paced the coverlet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pale enchantment held her sleepy-eyed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never on such a night have lovers met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Merlin paid his Demon all the monstrous debt.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-20">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“It shall be as thou wishest,” said the Dame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“All cates and dainties shall be stored there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quickly on this feast-night: by the tambour frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her own lute thou wilt see: no time to spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I am slow and feeble, and scarce dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On such a catering trust my dizzy head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wait here, my child, with patience; kneel in prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The while: Ah! thou must needs the lady wed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or may I never leave my grave among the dead.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-21">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So saying she hobbled off with busy fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lover’s endless minutes slowly pass’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Dame return’d, and whisper’d in his ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To follow her; with aged eyes aghast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From fright of dim espial. Safe at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many a dusky gallery, they gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maiden’s chamber, silken, hush’d and chaste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Porphyro took covert, pleased amain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His poor guide hurried back with agues in her brain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-22">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Her falt’ring hand upon the balustrade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Angela was feeling for the stair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Madeline, <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes’ charmed maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rose, like a mission’d spirit, unaware:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With silver taper’s light, and pious care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turn’d, and down the aged gossip led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To a safe level matting. Now prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Young Porphyro, for gazing on that bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She comes, she comes again, like ring-dove fray’d and fled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-23">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Out went the taper as she hurried in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its little smoke, in pallid moonshine, died:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She closed the door, she panted, all akin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To spirits of the air, and visions wide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No uttered syllable, or, woe betide!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to her heart, her heart was voluble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Paining with eloquence her balmy side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As though a tongueless nightingale should swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her throat in vain, and die, heart-stifled in her dell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-24">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">A casement high and triple arch’d there was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All garlanded with carven imag’ries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fruits, and flowers, and bunches of knot-grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And diamonded with panes of quaint device,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Innumerable of stains and splendid dyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As are the tiger-moth’s deep-damask’d wings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the midst, ’mong thousand heraldries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twilight saints, and dim emblazonings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shielded scutcheon blush’d with blood of queens and kings.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-25">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Full on this casement shone the wintry moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threw warm gules on Madeline’s fair breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As down she knelt for heaven’s grace and boon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rose-bloom fell on her hands, together prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on her silver cross soft amethyst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on her hair a glory, like a saint:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She seem’d a splendid angel, newly drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save wings, for heaven:⁠—Porphyro grew faint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She knelt, so pure a thing, so free from mortal taint.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-26">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Anon his heart revives: her vespers done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all its wreathed pearls her hair she frees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unclasps her warmed jewels one by one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loosens her fragrant bodice; by degrees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her rich attire creeps rustling to her knees:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Half-hidden, like a mermaid in sea-weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pensive awhile she dreams awake, and sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fancy, fair <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes in her bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But dares not look behind, or all the charm is fled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-27">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Soon, trembling in her soft and chilly nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sort of wakeful swoon, perplex’d she lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the poppied warmth of sleep oppress’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her soothed limbs, and soul fatigued away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flown, like a thought, until the morrow-day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blissfully haven’d both from joy and pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clasp’d like a missal where swart Paynims pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blinded alike from sunshine and from rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though a rose should shut, and be a bud again.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-28">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Stol’n to this paradise, and so entranced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Porphyro gazed upon her empty dress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And listen’d to her breathing, if it chanced</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wake into a slumberous tenderness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he heard, that minute did he bless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breathed himself: then from the closet crept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Noiseless as fear in a wide wilderness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over the hush’d carpet, silent, stept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’tween the curtains peep’d, where, lo!⁠—how fast she slept.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-29">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Then by the bed-side, where the faded moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made a dim, silver twilight, soft he set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A table, and, half-anguish’d, threw thereon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cloth of woven crimson, gold, and jet:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O for some drowsy Morphean amulet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The boisterous, midnight, festive clarion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The kettle-drum, and far-heard clarionet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Affray his ears, though but in dying tone:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hall-door shuts again, and all the noise is gone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-30">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And still she slept an azure-lidded sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In blanched linen, smooth, and lavender’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While he from forth the closet brought a heap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of candied apple, quince, and plum, and gourd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With jellies soother than the creamy curd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lucent syrops, tinct with cinnamon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Manna and dates, in argosy transferr’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Fez; and spiced dainties, every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From silken Samarcand to cedar’d Lebanon.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-31">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">These delicates he heap’d with glowing hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On golden dishes and in baskets bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wreathed silver: sumptuous they stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the retired quiet of the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Filling the chilly room with perfume light.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“And now, my love, my seraph fair, awake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art my heaven, and I thine eremite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Open thine eyes, for meek <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes’ sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or I shall drowse beside thee, so my soul doth ache.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-32">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thus whispering, his warm, unnerved arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sank in her pillow. Shaded was her dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the dusk curtains:⁠—’twas a midnight charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Impossible to melt as iced stream:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lustrous salvers in the moonlight gleam;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Broad golden fringe upon the carpet lies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seem’d he never, never could redeem</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From such a steadfast spell his lady’s eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So mused awhile, entoil’d in woofed phantasies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-33">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Awakening up, he took her hollow lute,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tumultuous,⁠—and, in chords that tenderest be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He play’d an ancient ditty, long since mute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Provence call’d “<i epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="fr">La belle dame sans mercy</i>:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close to her ear touching the melody;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith disturb’d, she utter’d a soft moan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ceased⁠—she panted quick⁠—and suddenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her blue affrayed eyes wide open shone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his knees he sank, pale as smooth-sculptured stone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-34">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Her eyes were open, but she still beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now wide awake, the vision of her sleep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was a painful change, that nigh expell’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blisses of her dream so pure and deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which fair Madeline began to weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And moan forth witless words with many a sigh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While still her gaze on Porphyro would keep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who knelt, with joined hands and piteous eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fearing to move or speak, she look’d so dreamingly.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-35">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ah, Porphyro!” said she, “but even now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy voice was at sweet tremble in mine ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made tuneable with every sweetest vow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those sad eyes were spiritual and clear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How changed thou art! how pallid, chill, and drear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give me that voice again, my Porphyro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those looks immortal, those complainings dear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh leave me not in this eternal woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if thou diest, my Love, I know not where to go.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-36">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Beyond a mortal man impassion’d far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At these voluptuous accents, he arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ethereal, flush’d, and like a throbbing star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seen mid the sapphire heaven’s deep repose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into her dream he melted, as the rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blendeth its odour with the violet,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Solution sweet: meantime the frost-wind blows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Love’s alarum pattering the sharp sleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the window-panes; <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes’ moon hath set.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-37">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">’Tis dark: quick pattereth the flaw-blown sleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“This is no dream, my bride, my Madeline!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis dark: the iced gusts still rave and beat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“No dream, alas! alas! and woe is mine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Porphyro will leave me here to fade and pine.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cruel! what traitor could thee hither bring?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I curse not, for my heart is lost in thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though thou forsakest a deceived thing;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dove forlorn and lost with sick unpruned wing.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-38">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“My Madeline! sweet dreamer! lovely bride!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Say, may I be for aye thy vassal blest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy beauty’s shield, heart-shaped and vermeil dyed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, silver shrine, here will I take my rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After so many hours of toil and quest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A famish’d pilgrim,⁠—saved by miracle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though I have found, I will not rob thy nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saving of thy sweet self; if thou think’st well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To trust, fair Madeline, to no rude infidel.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-39">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Hark! ’tis an elfin storm from faery land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of haggard seeming, but a boon indeed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arise⁠—arise! the morning is at hand:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bloated wassailers will never heed:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us away, my love, with happy speed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There are no ears to hear, or eyes to see,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drown’d all in Rhenish and the sleepy mead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awake! arise! my love, and fearless be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For o’er the southern moors I have a home for thee.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-40">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XL</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She hurried at his words, beset with fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For there were sleeping dragons all around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At glaring watch, perhaps, with ready spears⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down the wide stairs a darkling way they found.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all the house was heard no human sound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A chain-droopd lamp was flickering by each door;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The arras, rich with horseman, hawk, and hound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flutter’d in the besieging wind’s uproar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the long carpets rose along the gusty floor.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-41">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">They glide, like phantoms, into the wide hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like phantoms to the iron porch they glide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where lay the Porter, in uneasy sprawl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a huge empty flagon by his side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wakeful bloodhound rose, and shook his hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his sagacious eye an inmate owns:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By one, and one, the bolts full easy slide:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The chains lie silent on the footworn stones;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The key turns, and the door upon its hinges groans.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eve-of-st-agnes-42">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And they are gone: aye, ages long ago</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These lovers fled away into the storm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That night the Baron dreamt of many a woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his warrior-guests, with shade and form</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of witch, and demon, and large coffin-worm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were long be-nightmared. Angela the old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Died palsy-twitch’d, with meagre face deform:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Beadsman, after thousand aves told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For aye unsought-for slept among his ashes cold.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="the-eve-of-st-mark" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>The Eve of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mark</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">A Fragment</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Upon a Sabbath-day it fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twice holy was the Sabbath-bell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That call’d the folk to evening prayer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city streets were clean and fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From wholesome drench of April rains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, on the western window panes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chilly sunset faintly told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of unmatured green valleys cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the green thorny bloomless hedge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rivers new with spring-tide sedge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of primroses by shelter’d rills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And daisies on the aguish hills.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twice holy was the Sabbath-bell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silent streets were crowded well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With staid and pious companies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm from their fireside orat’ries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moving, with demurest air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To even-song, and vesper prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each arched porch, and entry low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was fill’d with patient folk and slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whispers hush, and shuffling feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While play’d the organ loud and sweet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The bells had ceased, the prayers begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Bertha had not yet half done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A curious volume, patch’d and torn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all day long, from earliest morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had taken captive her two eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among its golden broideries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perplex’d her with a thousand things,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stars of Heaven, and angels’ wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Martyrs in a fiery blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Azure saints and silver rays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moses’ breastplate and the seven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Candlesticks John saw in Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winged Lion of Saint Mark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Covenantal Ark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its many mysteries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cherubim and golden mice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bertha was a maiden fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelling in th’ old Minster-square;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her fireside she could see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sidelong, its rich antiquity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far as the Bishop’s garden wall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where sycamores and elm-trees tall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full-leaved, the forest had outstript,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By no sharp north-wind ever nipt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shelter’d by the mighty pile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bertha arose, and read awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With forehead ’gainst the window-pane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again she tried, and then again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until the dusk eve left her dark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the legend of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From plaited lawn-frill, fine and thin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She lifted up her soft warm chin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With aching neck and swimming eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dazed with saintly imag’ries.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All was gloom, and silent all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save now and then the still foot-fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one returning homewards late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past the echoing minster-gate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clamorous daws, that all the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above tree-tops and towers play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pair by pair had gone to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each in its ancient belfry-nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where asleep they fall betimes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To music and the drowsy chimes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All was silent, all was gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abroad and in the homely room:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down she sat, poor cheated soul!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And struck a lamp from the dismal coal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lean’d forward, with bright drooping hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slant book, full against the glare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her shadow, in uneasy guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hover’d about, a giant size,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On ceiling-beam and old oak chair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parrot’s cage, and panel-square;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the warm angled winter-screen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which were many monsters seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call’d doves of Siam, Lima mice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And legless birds of Paradise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Macaw, and tender Avadavat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And silken-furr’d Angora cat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untired she read, her shadow still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glower’d about, as it would fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The room with wildest forms and shades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though some ghostly queen of spades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had come to mock behind her back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dance, and ruffle her garments black.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untired she read the legend page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of holy Mark, from youth to age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On land, on sea, in pagan chains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoicing for his many pains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes the learned eremite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With golden star, or dagger bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Referr’d to pious poesies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Written in smallest crow-quill size</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the text; and thus the rhyme</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was parcell’d out from time to time:</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">⸺“Als writith he of swevenis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Men han beforne they wake in bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Whanne that hir friendes thinke him bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">In crimped shroude farre under grounde;</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">And how a litling child mote be</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">A saint er its nativitie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Gif that the modre (God her blesse!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Kepen in solitarinesse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">And kissen devoute the holy croce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Of Goddes love, and Sathan’s force,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">He writith; and thinges many mo</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Of swiche thinges I may not show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Bot I must tellen verilie</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Somdel of Saintè Cicilie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">And chieflie what he auctorethe</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Of Saintè Markis life and dethe:”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At length her constant eyelids come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the fervent martyrdom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then lastly to his holy shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exalt amid the tapers’ shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Venice,⁠⸺⁠</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ode-on-indolence" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Ode on Indolence</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>“They Toil Not, Neither Do They Spin.”</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="ode-on-indolence-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>One morn before me were three figures seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bowed necks, and joined hands, side-faced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one behind the other stepp’d serene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In placid sandals, and in white robes graced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They pass’d, like figures on a marble urn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When shifted round to see the other side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They came again; as when the urn once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is shifted round, the first seen shades return;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they were strange to me, as may betide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With vases, to one deep in Phidian lore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-on-indolence-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How is it, Shadows! that I knew ye not?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How came ye muffled in so hush a mask?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it a silent deep-disguised plot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To steal away, and leave without a task</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My idle days? Ripe was the drowsy hour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blissful cloud of summer-indolence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Benumb’d my eyes; my pulse grew less and less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pain had no sting, and pleasure’s wreath no flower:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, why did ye not melt, and leave my sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Unhaunted quite of all but⁠—nothingness?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-on-indolence-3">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>A third time pass’d they by, and, passing, turn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each one the face a moment whiles to me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then faded, and to follow them I burn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ached for wings, because I knew the three;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first was a fair Maid, and Love her name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second was Ambition, pale of cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And ever watchful with fatigued eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last, whom I love more, the more of blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is heap’d upon her, maiden most unmeek,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I knew to be my demon Poesy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-on-indolence-4">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>They faded, and, forsooth! I wanted wings:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O folly! What is Love? and where is it?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for that poor Ambition! it springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From a man’s little heart’s short fever-fit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Poesy!⁠—no,⁠—she has not a joy,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least for me,⁠—so sweet as drowsy noons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And evenings steep’d in honied indolence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, for an age so shelter’d from annoy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I may never know how change the moons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or hear the voice of busy common-sense!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-on-indolence-5">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And once more came they by;⁠—alas! wherefore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My sleep had been embroider’d with dim dreams;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul had been a lawn besprinkled o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With flowers, and stirring shades, and baffled beams:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The morn was clouded, but no shower fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho’ in her lids hung the sweet tears of May;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The open casement press’d a new-leaved vine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let in the budding warmth and throstle’s lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Shadows! ’twas a time to bid farewell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Upon your skirts had fallen no tears of mine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-on-indolence-6">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>So, ye three Ghosts, adieu! Ye cannot raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My head cool-bedded in the flowery grass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I would not be dieted with praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pet-lamb in a sentimental farce!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fade softly from my eyes and be once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In masque-like figures on the dreamy urn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Farewell! I yet have visions for the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for the day faint visions there is store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Vanish, ye Phantoms! from my idle spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the clouds, and nevermore return!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="ode-on-a-grecian-urn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Ode on a Grecian Urn</h2>
			<section id="ode-on-a-grecian-urn-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thou still unravish’d bride of quietness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou foster-child of Silence and slow Time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sylvan historian, who canst thus express</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A flowery tale more sweetly than our rhyme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What leaf-fringed legend haunts about thy shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of deities or mortals, or of both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In Tempe or the dales of Arcady?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What men or gods are these? what maidens loth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What mad pursuit? What struggle to escape?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What pipes and timbrels? What wild ecstacy?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-on-a-grecian-urn-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are sweeter; therefore, ye soft pipes, play on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to the sensual ear, but, more endear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pipe to the spirit ditties of no tone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair youth, beneath the trees, thou canst not leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy song, nor ever can those trees be bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Bold Lover, never, never canst thou kiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though winning near the goal⁠—yet, do not grieve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She cannot fade, though thou hast not thy bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever wilt thou love, and she be fair!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-on-a-grecian-urn-3">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, happy, happy boughs! that cannot shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your leaves, nor ever bid the Spring adieu;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, happy melodist, unwearied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever piping songs for ever new:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More happy love! more happy, happy love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever warm and still to be enjoy’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For ever panting, and for ever young;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All breathing human passion far above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That leaves a heart high-sorrowful and cloy’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A burning forehead, and a parching tongue.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-on-a-grecian-urn-4">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Who are these coming to the sacrifice?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To what green altar, O mysterious priest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lead’st thou that heifer lowing at the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her silken flanks with garlands drest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What little town by river or sea shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or mountain-built with peaceful citadel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Is emptied of this folk, this pious morn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, little town, thy streets for evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will silent be; and not a soul to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why thou art desolate, can e’er return.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-on-a-grecian-urn-5">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O Attic shade! Fair attitude! with brede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of marble men and maidens overwrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With forest branches and the trodden weed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou, silent form, dost tease us out of thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As doth eternity: Cold Pastoral!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When old age shall this generation waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou shalt remain, in midst of other woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than ours, a friend to man, to whom thou say’st,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Beauty is truth, truth beauty,”⁠—that is all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="ode-on-melancholy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Ode on Melancholy</h2>
			<section id="ode-on-melancholy-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>No, no! go not to Lethe, neither twist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wolf’s-bane, tight-rooted, for its poisonous wine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor suffer thy pale forehead to be kiss’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By nightshade, ruby grape of Proserpine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make not your rosary of yew-berries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor let the beetle, or the death-moth be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Your mournful Psyche, nor the downy owl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A partner in your sorrow’s mysteries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For shade to shade will come too drowsily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And drown the wakeful anguish of the soul.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-on-melancholy-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But when the melancholy fit shall fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sudden from heaven like a weeping cloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fosters the droop-headed flowers all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hides the green hills in an April shroud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then glut thy sorrow on a morning rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or on the rainbow of the salt-sand wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or on the wealth of globed peonies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if thy mistress some rich anger shows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emprison her soft hand, and let her rave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And feed deep, deep upon her peerless eyes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-on-melancholy-3">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She dwells with Beauty⁠—Beauty that must die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Joy, whose hand is ever at his lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bidding adieu; and aching Pleasure nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turning to poison while the bee-mouth sips:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, in the very temple of Delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Veil’d Melancholy has her sovran shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Though seen of none save him whose strenuous tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can burst Joy’s grape against his palate fine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soul shall taste the sadness of her might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And be among her cloudy trophies hung.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-9" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Sonnet</span>
				<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Why Did I Laugh To-Night?</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Why did I laugh to-night? No voice will tell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No God, no Demon of severe response,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deigns to reply from Heaven or from Hell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then to my human heart I turn at once.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heart! Thou and I are here sad and alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say, why did I laugh? O mortal pain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Darkness! Darkness! ever must I moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To question Heaven and Hell and Heart in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why did I laugh? I know this Being’s lease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My fancy to its utmost blisses spreads;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet would I on this very midnight cease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the world’s gaudy ensigns see in shreds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Verse, Fame, and Beauty are intense indeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Death intenser⁠—Death is Life’s high meed.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-dream-after-reading-dantes-episode-of-paolo-and-francesca" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Dream, After Reading Dante’s Episode of “Paolo and Francesca”</h2>
			<p>
				<span>As Hermes once rook to his feathers light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When lulled Argus, baffled, swoon’d and slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So on a Delphic reed, my idle spright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So play’d, so charm’d, so conquer’d, so bereft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dragon-world in all its hundred eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seeing it asleep, so fled away⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to pure Ida with its snow-cold skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor unto Tempe where Jove grieved a day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to that second circle of sad hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where ’mid the gust, the whirlwind, and the flaw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rain and hail-stones, lovers need not tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their sorrows. Pale were the sweet lips I saw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale were the lips I kiss’d, and fair the form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I floated with, about that melancholy storm.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ode-to-fanny" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Ode to Fanny</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Physician Nature! let my spirit blood!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O ease my heart of verse and let me rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throw me upon thy Tripod, till the flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of stifling numbers ebbs from my full breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A theme! a theme! great Nature! give a theme;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Let me begin my dream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I come⁠—I see thee, as thou standest there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beckon me not into the wintry air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! dearest love, sweet home of all my fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hopes, and joys, and panting miseries,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To-night, if I may guess, thy beauty wears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A smile of such delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As brilliant and as bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As when with ravish’d, aching, vassal eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Lost in soft amaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I gaze, I gaze!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who now, with greedy looks, eats up my feast?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What stare outfaces now my silver moon!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! keep that hand unravished at the least;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Let, let the amorous burn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But, pr’ythee, do not turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The current of your heart from me so soon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O! save, in charity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The quickest pulse for me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Save it for me, sweet love! though music breathe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Voluptuous visions into the warm air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though swimming through the dance’s dangerous wreath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Be like an April day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Smiling and cold and gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A temperate lily, temperate as fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Then, Heaven! there will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A warmer June for me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Why, this⁠—you’ll say, my Fanny! is not true:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Put your soft hand upon your snowy side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the heart beats: confess⁠—’tis nothing new⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Must not a woman be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A feather on the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sway’d to and fro by every wind and tide?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of as uncertain speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As blow-ball from the mead?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I know it⁠—and to know it is despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To one who loves you as I love, sweet Fanny!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose heart goes fluttering for you everywhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Nor, when away you roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Dare keep its wretched home:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love, love alone, has pains severe and many:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Then, loveliest! keep me free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From torturing jealousy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! if you prize my subdued soul above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The poor, the fading, brief pride of an hour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let none profane my Holy See of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Or with a rude hand break</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The sacramental cake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let none else touch the just new-budded flower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">If not⁠—may my eyes close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Love! on their last repose.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<i xml:lang="fr">La Belle Dame Sans Merci</i>
			</h2>
			<section id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, what can ail thee, wretched wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone and palely loitering?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sedge is wither’d from the lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And no birds sing.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, what can ail thee, wretched wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So haggard and so woe-begone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The squirrel’s granary is full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the harvest’s done.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci-3">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I see a lily on thy brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With anguish moist and fever dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on thy cheek a fading rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast withereth too.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci-4">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I met a lady in the meads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full beautiful⁠—a faery’s child;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hair was long, her foot was light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her eyes were wild.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci-5">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I set her on my pacing steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nothing else saw all day long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sideways would she lean, and sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A faery’s song.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci-6">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I made a garland for her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bracelets too, and fragrant zone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She look’d at me as she did love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made sweet moan.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci-7">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She found me roots of relish sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And honey wild, and manna dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sure in language strange she said⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I love thee true.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci-8">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She took me to her elfin grot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there she gazed, and sighed deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there I shut her wild wild eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So kiss’d to sleep.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci-9">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And there we slumber’d on the moss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there I dream’d⁠—Ah! woe betide!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The latest dream I ever dream’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the cold hill side.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci-10">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I saw pale kings, and princes too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pale warriors, death-pale were they all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They cried⁠—“<i xml:lang="fr">La Belle Dame sans Merci</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath thee in thrall!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci-11">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I saw their starved lips in the gloam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With horrid warning gaped wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I awoke, and found me here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the cold hill side.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci-12">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>And this is why I sojourn here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone and palely loitering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though the sedge is wither’d from the lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And no birds sing.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="chorus-of-fairies" epub:type="z3998:poem z3998:drama">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Chorus of Fairies</h2>
				<p epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">Fire, Air, Earth, And Water Salamander, Zephyr, Dusketha, and Breama</p>
			</header>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salamander</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Happy, happy glowing fire!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Zephyr</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Fragrant air! delicious light!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dusketha</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Let me to my glooms retire!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Breama</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I to green-weed rivers bright!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salamander</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Happy, happy glowing fire!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dazzling bowers of soft retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever let my nourish’d wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a bat’s, still wandering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faintly fan your fiery spaces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirit sole in deadly places.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In unhaunted roar and blaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open eyes that never daze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me see the myriad shapes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of men, and beasts, and fish, and apes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Portray’d in many a fiery den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wrought by spumy bitumen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the deep intenser roof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arched every way, aloof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me breathe upon my skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And anger their live tapestries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free from cold, and every care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of chilly rain, and shivering air.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Zephyr</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Spright of Fire! away! away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or your very roundelay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will sear my plumage newly budded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From its quilled sheath, and studded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the self-same dews that fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the May-grown Asphodel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spright of Fire⁠—away! away!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Breama</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Spright of Fire⁠—away! away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zephyr, blue-eyed Faery, turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And see my cool sedge-shaded urn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where it rests its mossy brim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid water-mint and cresses dim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the flowers, in sweet troubles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift their eyes above the bubbles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like our Queen, when she would please</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sleep, and Oberon will tease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love me, blue-eyed Faery! true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soothly I am sick for you.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Zephyr</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Gentle Breama! by the first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Violet young nature nurst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will bathe myself with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So you sometime follow me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my home, far, far, in west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far beyond the search and quest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the golden-browed sun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come with me, o’er tops of trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my fragrant palaces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where they ever floating are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the cherish of a star</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call’d Vesper, who with silver veil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever hides his brilliance pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever gently-drowsed doth keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twilight for the Fays to sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fear not that your watery hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will thirst in drouthy ringlets there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clouds of stored summer rains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt taste, before the stains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the mountain soil they take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And too unlucent for thee make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love thee, crystal Faery, true!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sooth I am as sick for you!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salamander</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Out, ye aguish Faeries, out!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chilly lovers, what a rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep ye with your frozen breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Colder than the mortal death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adder-eyed Dusketha, speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall we leave them, and go seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the earth’s wide entrails old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Couches warm as theirs is cold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O for a fiery gloom and thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dusketha, so enchantingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freckle-wing’d and lizard-sided!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dusketha</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By thee, Spright, will I be guided!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I care not for cold or heat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frost and flame, or sparks, or sleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my essence are the same;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I honour more the flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spright of fire, I follow thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wheresoever it may be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the torrid spouts and fountains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Underneath earth-quaked mountains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, at thy supreme desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touch the very pulse of fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With my bare unlidded eyes.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salamander</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Sweet Dusketha! paradise!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Off, ye icy Spirits, fly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frosty creatures of the sky!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dusketha</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Breathe upon them, fiery Spright!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Zephyr</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Breama</b> (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">to each other</span>)</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Away! away to our delight!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salamander</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Go, feed on icicles, while we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bedded in tongued flames will be.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dusketha</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lead me to these fev’rous glooms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spright of Fire!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p class="speech-title">
						<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Breama</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Me to the blooms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blue eyed Zephyr of those flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far in the west where the May-cloud lowers:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the beams of still Vesper, where winds are all whist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are shed thro’ the rain and the milder mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twilight your floating bowers.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="to-sleep" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Sleep</h2>
			<p>
				<span>O soft embalmer of the still midnight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shutting, with careful fingers and benign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our gloom-pleased eyes, embower’d from the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enshaded in forgetfulness divine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O soothest Sleep! if so it please thee, close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In midst of this thine hymn, my willing eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wait the amen, ere thy poppy throws</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Around my bed its dewy charities;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then save me, or the passed day will shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon my pillow, breeding many woes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save me from curious conscience, that still lords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its strength for darkness, burrowing like a mole;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turn the key deftly in the oiled wards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seal the hushed casket of my soul.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="another-on-fame" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Another on Fame</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Fame, like a wayward girl, will still be coy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To those who woo her with too slavish knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But makes surrender to some thoughtless boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dotes the more upon a heart at ease;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is a Gipsy,⁠—will not speak to those</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who have not learnt to be content without her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Jilt, whose ear was never whisper’d close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who thinks they scandal her who talk about her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A very Gipsy is she, Nilus-born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sister-in-law to jealous Potiphar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye lovesick Bards! repay her scorn for scorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye Artists lovelorn! madmen that ye are!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make your best bow to her and bid adieu,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, if she likes it, she will follow you.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-fame" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">On Fame</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>“You cannot eat your cake and have it too.”</p>
					<cite>Proverb</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>How fever’d is that man, who cannot look</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon his mortal days with temperate blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who vexes all the leaves of his life’s book,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And robs his fair name of its maidenhood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is as if the rose should pluck herself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or the ripe plum finger its misty bloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if a Naiad, like a meddling elf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should darken her pure grot with muddy gloom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the rose leaves herself upon the brier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For winds to kiss and grateful bees to feed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the ripe plum still wears its dim attire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The undisturbed lake has crystal space:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Why then should man, teasing the world for grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spoil his salvation for a fierce miscreed?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-10" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Sonnet</span>
				<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">If by Dull Rhymes</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>If by dull rhymes our English must be chain’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, like Andromeda, the Sonnet sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fetter’d, in spite of pained loveliness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us find out, if we must be constrain’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sandals more interwoven and complete</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fit the naked foot of poesy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us inspect the lyre, and weigh the stress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of every chord, and see what may be gain’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By ear industrious, and attention meet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Misers of sound and syllable, no less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than Midas of his coinage, let us be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Jealous of dead leaves in the bay-wreath crown:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, if we may not let the Muse be free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She will be bound with garlands of her own.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ode-to-psyche" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Ode to Psyche</h2>
			<section id="ode-to-psyche-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O Goddess! hear these tuneless numbers, wrung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By sweet enforcement and remembrance dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pardon that thy secrets should be sung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even into thine own soft-conched ear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surely I dreamt to-day, or did I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The winged Psyche with awaken’d eyes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wander’d in a forest thoughtlessly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, on the sudden, fainting with surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw two fair creatures, couched side by side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In deepest grass, beneath the whisp’ring roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of leaves and trembled blossoms, where there ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">A brooklet, scarce espied:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-to-psyche-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>’Mid hush’d, cool-rooted flowers fragrant eyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blue, silver-white, and budded Tyrian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They lay calm-breathing on the bedded grass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their arms embraced, and their pinions too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their lips touch’d not, but had not bade adieu,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if disjoined by soft-handed slumber,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ready still past kisses to outnumber</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At tender eye-dawn of aurorean love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">The winged boy I knew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who wast thou, O happy, happy dove?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">His Psyche true!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-to-psyche-3">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O latest-born and loveliest vision far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all Olympus’ faded hierarchy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fairer than Phœbe’s sapphire-region’d star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Vesper, amorous glow-worm of the sky;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fairer than these, though temple thou hast none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Nor altar heap’d with flowers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor virgin-choir to make delicious moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Upon the midnight hours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No voice, no lute, no pipe, no incense sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From chain-swung censer teeming;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No shrine, no grove, no oracle, no heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pale-mouth’d prophet dreaming.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-to-psyche-4">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O brightest! though too late for antique vows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too, too late for the fond believing lyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When holy were the haunted forest boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holy the air, the water, and the fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet even in these days so far retired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From happy pieties, thy lucent fans,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fluttering among the faint Olympians,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see, and sing, by my own eyes inspired.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So let me be thy choir, and make a moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Upon the midnight hours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy voice, thy lute, thy pipe, thy incense sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From swinged censer teeming;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy shrine, thy grove, thy oracle, thy heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pale-mouth’d prophet dreaming.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-to-psyche-5">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Yes, I will be thy priest, and build a fane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In some untrodden region of my mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where branched thoughts, new-grown with pleasant pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of pines shall murmur in the wind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far, far around shall those dark-cluster’d trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fledge the wild-ridged mountains steep by steep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there by zephyrs, streams, and birds, and bees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moss-lain Dryads shall be lulled to sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the midst of this wide quietness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rosy sanctuary will I dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the wreath’d trellis of a working brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With buds, and bells, and stars without a name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all the gardener Fancy e’er could feign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who breeding flowers, will never breed the same:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there shall be for thee all soft delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">That shadowy thought can win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bright torch, and a casement ope at night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">To let the warm Love in!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="ode-to-a-nightingale" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Ode to a Nightingale</h2>
			<section id="ode-to-a-nightingale-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My heart aches, and a drowsy numbness pains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My sense, as though of hemlock I had drunk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or emptied some dull opiate to the drains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One minute past, and Lethe-wards had sunk:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not through envy of thy happy lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But being too happy in thine happiness,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That thou, light-winged Dryad of the trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">In some melodious plot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of beechen green, and shadows numberless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Singest of summer in full-throated ease.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-to-a-nightingale-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O for a draught of vintage! that hath been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cool’d a long age in the deep-delved earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tasting of Flora and the country-green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dance, and Provençal song, and sunburnt mirth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O for a beaker full of the warm South,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of the true, the blushful Hippocrene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With beaded bubbles winking at the brim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And purple-stained mouth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I might drink, and leave the world unseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And with thee fade away into the forest dim:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-to-a-nightingale-3">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Fade far away, dissolve, and quite forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What thou among the leaves hast never known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weariness, the fever, and the fret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here, where men sit and hear each other groan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where palsy shakes a few, sad, last gray hairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where youth grows pale, and spectre-thin, and dies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Where but to think is to be full of sorrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And leaden-eyed despairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Beauty cannot keep her lustrous eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or new Love pine at them beyond to-morrow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-to-a-nightingale-4">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Away! away! for I will fly to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not charioted by Bacchus and his pards,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on the viewless wings of Poesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though the dull brain perplexes and retards:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already with thee! tender is the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And haply the Queen-Moon is on her throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cluster’d around by all her starry Fays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">But here there is no light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save what from heaven is with the breezes blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through verdurous glooms and winding mossy ways.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-to-a-nightingale-5">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I cannot see what flowers are at my feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor what soft incense hangs upon the boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, in embalmed darkness, guess each sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith the seasonable month endows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grass, the thicket, and the fruit-tree wild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">White hawthorn, and the pastoral eglantine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fast fading violets cover’d up in leaves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And mid-May’s eldest child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The coming musk-rose, full of dewy wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The murmurous haunt of flies on summer eves.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-to-a-nightingale-6">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Darkling I listen; and, for many a time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have been half in love with easeful Death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call’d him soft names in many a mused rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take into the air my quiet breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now more than ever seems it rich to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cease upon the midnight with no pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">While thou art pouring forth thy soul abroad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">In such an ecstacy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still wouldst thou sing, and I have ears in vain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To thy high requiem become a sod.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-to-a-nightingale-7">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thou wast not born for death, immortal Bird!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No hungry generations tread thee down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The voice I hear this passing night was heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In ancient days by emperor and clown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps the self-same song that found a path</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the sad heart of Ruth, when, sick for home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She stood in tears amid the alien corn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">The same that oft-times hath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charm’d magic casements, opening on the foam</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of perilous seas, in faery lands forlorn.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ode-to-a-nightingale-8">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Forlorn! the very word is like a bell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To toll me back from thee to my sole self!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu! the fancy cannot cheat so well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she is famed to do, deceiving elf.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu! adieu! thy plaintive anthem fades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Past the near meadows, over the still stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Up the hill-side; and now ’tis buried deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">In the next valley-glades:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was it a vision, or a waking dream?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fled is that music:⁠—do I wake or sleep?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="lamia" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lamia</h2>
			<section id="lamia-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a time, before the faery broods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drove Nymph and Satyr from the prosperous woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before King Oberon’s bright diadem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sceptre, and mantle, clasp’d with dewy gem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frighted away the Dryads and the Fauns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From rushes green, and brakes, and cowslipp’d lawns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ever-smitten Hermes empty left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His golden throne, bent warm on amorous theft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From high Olympus had he stolen light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this side of Jove’s clouds, to escape the sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his great summer, and made retreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a forest on the shores of Crete.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For somewhere in that sacred island dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nymph, to whom all hoofed Satyrs knelt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At whose white feet the languid Tritons poured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pearls, while on land they wither’d and adored.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fast by the springs where she to bathe was wont,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in those meads where sometimes she might haunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were strewn rich gifts, unknown to any Muse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Fancy’s casket were unlock’d to choose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, what a world of love was at her feet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Hermes thought, and a celestial heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burnt from his winged heels to either ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from a whiteness, as the lily clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blush’d into roses ’mid his golden hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fallen in jealous curls about his shoulders bare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">From vale to vale, from wood to wood, he flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breathing upon the flowers his passion new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wound with many a river to its head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find where this sweet nymph prepared her secret bed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain; the sweet nymph might nowhere be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so he rested, on the lonely ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pensive, and full of painful jealousies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Wood Gods, and even the very trees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There as he stood, he heard a mournful voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as once heard, in gentle heart, destroys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All pain but pity: thus the lone voice spake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“When from this wreathed tomb shall I awake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When move in a sweet body fit for life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love, and pleasure, and the ruddy strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hearts and lips! Ah, miserable me!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The God, dove-footed, glided silently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round bush and tree, soft-brushing, in his speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The taller grasses and full-flowering weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until he found a palpitating snake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright, and <i xml:lang="fr">cirque-couchant</i> in a dusky brake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She was a gordian shape of dazzling hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vermilion-spotted, golden, green, and blue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Striped like a zebra, freckled like a pard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eyed like a peacock, and all crimson barr’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of silver moons, that, as she breathed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dissolved, or brighter shone, or interwreathed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their lustres with the gloomier tapestries⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So rainbow-sided, touch’d with miseries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She seem’d, at once, some penanced lady elf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some demon’s mistress, or the demon’s self.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her crest she wore a wannish fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprinkled with stars, like Ariadne’s tiar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her head was serpent, but ah, bitter-sweet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had a woman’s mouth with all its pearls complete:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for her eyes⁠—what could such eyes do there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But weep, and weep, that they were born so fair?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Proserpine still weeps for her Sicilian air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her throat was serpent, but the words she spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came, as through bubbling honey, for Love’s sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus; while Hermes on his pinions lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a stoop’d falcon ere he takes his prey:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Fair Hermes! crown’d with feathers, fluttering light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had a splendid dream of thee last night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw thee sitting, on a throne of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Gods, upon Olympus old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The only sad one; for thou didst not hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soft, lute-finger’d Muses chanting clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor even Apollo when he sang alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deaf to his throbbing throat’s long, long melodious moan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I dreamt I saw thee, robed in purple flakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Break amorous through the clouds, as morning breaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, swiftly as a bright Phœbean dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strike for the Cretan isle; and here thou art!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too gentle Hermes, hast thou found the maid?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat the star of Lethe not delay’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His rosy eloquence, and thus inquired:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou smooth-lipp’d serpent, surely high-inspired!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou beauteous wreath, with melancholy eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possess whatever bliss thou canst devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Telling me only where my nymph is fled,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where she doth breathe!” “Bright planet, thou hast said,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Return’d the snake, “but seal with oaths, fair God!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I swear,” said Hermes, “by my serpent rod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by thine eyes, and by thy starry crown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light flew his earnest words, among the blossoms blown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thus again the brilliance feminine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Too frail of heart! for this lost nymph of thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free as the air, invisibly, she strays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About these thornless wilds; her pleasant days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She tastes unseen; unseen her nimble feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave traces in the grass and flowers sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From weary tendrils, and bow’d branches green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She plucks the fruit unseen, she bathes unseen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by my power is her beauty veil’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep it unaffronted, unassail’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the love-glances of unlovely eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Satyrs, Fauns, and blear’d Silenus’ sighs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pale grew her immortality, for woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all these lovers, and she grieved so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I took compassion on her, bade her steep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hair in weïrd syrops, that would keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her loveliness invisible, yet free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wander as she loves, in liberty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt behold her, Hermes, thou alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou wilt, as thou swearest, grant my boon!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, once again, the charmed God began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An oath, and through the serpent’s ears it ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm, tremulous, devout, psalterian.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ravish’d she lifted her Circean head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blush’d a live damask, and swift-lisping said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I was a woman, let me have once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woman’s shape, and charming as before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love a youth of Corinth⁠—O the bliss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me my woman’s form, and place me where he is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stoop, Hermes, let me breathe upon thy brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt see thy sweet nymph even now.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The God on half-shut feathers sank serene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She breathed upon his eyes, and swift was seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of both the guarded nymph near-smiling on the green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was no dream; or say a dream it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Real are the dreams of Gods, and smoothly pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their pleasures in a long immortal dream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One warm, flush’d moment, hovering, it might seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dash’d by the wood-nymph’s beauty, so he burn’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, lighting on the printless verdure, turn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the swoon’d serpent, and with languid arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delicate, put to proof the lithe Caducean charm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So done, upon the nymph his eyes he bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of adoring tears and blandishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And towards her stept: she, like a moon in wane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faded before him, cower’d, nor could restrain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her fearful sobs, self-folding like a flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That faints into itself at evening hour:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the God fostering her chilled hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She felt the warmth, her eyelids open’d bland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, like new flowers at morning song of bees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bloom’d, and gave up her honey to the lees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the green-recessed woods they flew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor grew they pale, as mortal lovers do.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Left to herself, the serpent now began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To change; her elfin blood in madness ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her mouth foam’d, and the grass, therewith besprent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wither’d at dew so sweet and virulent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyes in torture fix’d, and anguish drear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hot, glazed, and wide, with lid-lashes all sear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flash’d phosphor and sharp sparks, without one cooling tear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The colours all inflamed throughout her train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She writhed about, convulsed with scarlet pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A deep volcanian yellow took the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all her milder-mooned body’s grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as the lava ravishes the mead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spoilt all her silver mail, and golden brede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made gloom of all her frecklings, streaks and bars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eclipsed her crescents, and lick’d up her stars:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that, in moments few, she was undrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all her sapphires, greens, and amethyst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rubious-argent: of all these bereft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing but pain and ugliness were left.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still shone her crown; that vanish’d, also she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melted and disappear’d as suddenly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the air, her new voice luting soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried, “Lycius! gentle Lycius!”⁠—Borne aloft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the bright mists about the mountains hoar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These words dissolved: Crete’s forests heard no more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Whither fled Lamia, now a lady bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A full-born beauty new and exquisite?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fled into that valley they pass o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who go to Corinth from Cenchreas’ shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rested at the foot of those wild hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rugged founts of the Peræan rills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of that other ridge whose barren back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretches, with all its mist and cloudy rack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>South-westward to Cleone. There she stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About a young bird’s flutter from a wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair, on a sloping green of mossy tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a clear pool, wherein she passioned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see herself escaped from so sore ills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While her robes flaunted with the daffodils.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Ah, happy Lycius!⁠—for she was a maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More beautiful than ever twisted braid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or sigh’d, or blush’d, or on spring-flowered lea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spread a green kirtle to the minstrelsy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A virgin purest lipp’d, yet in the lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love deep learned to the red heart’s core:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not one hour old, yet of sciential brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To unperplex bliss from its neighbour pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Define their pettish limits, and estrange</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their points of contact, and swift counterchange;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intrigue with the specious chaos, and dispart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its most ambiguous atoms with sure art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though in Cupid’s college she had spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet days a lovely graduate, still unshent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kept his rosy terms in idle languishment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Why this fair creature chose so fairily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the wayside to linger, we shall see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first ’tis fit to tell how she could muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dream, when in the serpent prison-house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all she list, strange or magnificent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How, ever, where she will’d, her spirit went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether to faint Elysium, or where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down through tress-lifting waves the Nereids fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wind into Thetis’ bower by many a pearly stair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or where God Bacchus drains his cups divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretch’d out, at ease, beneath a glutinous pine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or where in Pluto’s gardens palatine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mulciber’s columns gleam in far piazzian line.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometimes into cities she would send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dream, with feast and rioting to blend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once, while among mortals dreaming thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She saw the young Corinthian Lycius</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charioting foremost in the envious race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a young Jove with calm uneager face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fell into a swooning love of him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now on the moth-time of that evening dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would return that way, as well she knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Corinth from the shore; for freshly blew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eastern soft wind, and his galley now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grated the quay-stones with her brazen prow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In port Cenchreas, from Egina isle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh anchor’d; whither he had been awhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sacrifice to Jove, whose temple there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waits with high marble doors for blood and incense rare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jove heard his vows, and better’d his desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by some freakful chance he made retire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his companions, and set forth to walk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps grown wearied of their Corinth talk:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the solitary hills he fared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thoughtless at first, but ere eve’s star appear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His phantasy was lost, where reason fades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the calm’d twilight of Platonic shades.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lamia beheld him coming, near, more near⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close to her passing, in indifference drear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His silent sandals swept the mossy green;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So neighbour’d to him, and yet so unseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She stood: he pass’d, shut up in mysteries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mind wrapp’d like his mantle, while her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow’d his steps, and her neck regal white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn’d⁠—syllabling thus, “Ah, Lycius bright!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And will you leave me on the hills alone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius, look back! and be some pity shown.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did; not with cold wonder fearingly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Orpheus-like at an Eurydice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For so delicious were the words she sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seem’d he had loved them a whole summer long:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon his eyes had drunk her beauty up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving no drop in the bewildering cup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still the cup was full,⁠—while he, afraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest she should vanish ere his lips had paid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Due adoration, thus began to adore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her soft look growing coy, she saw his chain so sure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Leave thee alone! Look back! Ah, Goddess, see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether my eyes can ever turn from thee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For pity do not this sad heart belie⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as thou vanishest so I shall die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stay! though a Naiad of the rivers, stay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thy far wishes will thy streams obey:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stay! though the greenest woods be thy domain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone they can drink up the morning rain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though a descended Pleiad, will not one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thine harmonious sisters keep in tune</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy spheres, and as thy silver proxy shine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sweetly to these ravish’d ears of mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came thy sweet greeting, that if thou shouldst fade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy memory will waste me to a shade:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For pity do not melt!”⁠—“If I should stay,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said Lamia, “here, upon this floor of clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pain my steps upon these flowers too rough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What canst thou say or do of charm enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dull the nice remembrance of my home?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou canst not ask me with thee here to roam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over these hills and vales, where no joy is,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empty of immortality and bliss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art a scholar, Lycius, and must know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That finer spirits cannot breathe below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In human climes, and live: Alas! poor youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What taste of purer air hast thou to soothe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My essence? What serener palaces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I may all my many senses please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by mysterious sleights a hundred thirsts appease?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It cannot be⁠—Adieu!” So said, she rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tiptoe with white arms spread. He, sick to lose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The amorous promise of her lone complain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swoon’d murmuring of love, and pale with pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cruel lady, without any show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sorrow for her tender favourite’s woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rather, if her eyes could brighter be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With brighter eyes and slow amenity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put her new lips to his, and gave afresh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The life she had so tangled in her mesh:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he from one trance was weakening</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into another, she began to sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy in beauty, life, and love, and every thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A song of love, too sweet for earthly lyres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While, like held breath, the stars drew in their panting fires.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then she whisper’d in such trembling tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As those who, safe together met alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the first time through many anguish’d days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Use other speech than looks; bidding him raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His drooping head, and clear his soul of doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that she was a woman, and without</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Any more subtle fluid in her veins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than throbbing blood, and that the self-same pains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inhabited her frail-strung heart as his.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And next she wonder’d how his eyes could miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her face so long in Corinth, where, she said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She dwelt but half retired, and there had led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Days happy as the gold coin could invent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the aid of love; yet in content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she saw him, as once she pass’d him by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where ’gainst a column he leant thoughtfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Venus’ temple porch, ’mid baskets heap’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of amorous herbs and flowers, newly reap’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Late on that eve, as ’twas the night before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Adonian feast; whereof she saw no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wept alone those days, for why should she adore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius from death awoke into amaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see her still, and singing so sweet lays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then from amaze into delight he fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear her whisper woman’s lore so well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every word she spake enticed him on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To unperplex’d delight and pleasure known.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the mad poets say whate’er they please</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the sweets of Fairies, Peris, Goddesses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is not such a treat among them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haunters of cavern, lake, and waterfall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a real woman, lineal indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Pyrrha’s pebbles or old Adam’s seed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus gentle Lamia judged, and judged aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Lycius could not love in half a fright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So threw the goddess off, and won his heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More pleasantly by playing woman’s part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With no more awe than what her beauty gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, while it smote, still guaranteed to save.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius to all made eloquent reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marrying to every word a twin-born sigh:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And last, pointing to Corinth, ask’d her sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ’twas too far that night for her soft feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The way was short, for Lamia’s eagerness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made, by a spell, the triple league decrease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a few paces; not at all surmised</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By blinded Lycius, so in her comprised:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They pass’d the city gates, he knew not how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So noiseless, and he never thought to know.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As men talk in a dream, so Corinth all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throughout her palaces imperial,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all her populous streets and temples lewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mutter’d, like tempest in the distance brew’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the wide-spreaded night above her towers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men, women, rich and poor, in the cool hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shuffled their sandals o’er the pavement white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Companion’d or alone; while many a light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flared, here and there, from wealthy festivals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And threw their moving shadows on the walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or found them cluster’d in the corniced shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some arch’d temple door, or dusky colonnade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Muffling his face, of greeting friends in fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her fingers he press’d hard, as one came near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With curl’d gray beard, sharp eyes, and smooth bald crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slow-stepp’d, and robed in philosophic gown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius shrank closer, as they met and past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into his mantle, adding wings to haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While hurried Lamia trembled: “Ah,” said he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why do you shudder, love, so ruefully?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why does your tender palm dissolve in dew?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I’m wearied,” said fair Lamia: “tell me who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is that old man? I cannot bring to mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His features:⁠—Lycius! wherefore did you blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yourself from his quick eyes?” Lycius replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“ ’Tis Apollonius sage, my trusty guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And good instructor; but to-night he seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ghost of folly haunting my sweet dreams.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">While yet he spake they had arrived before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pillar’d porch, with lofty portal door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where hung a silver lamp, whose phosphor glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reflected in the slabbed steps below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mild as a star in water; for so new</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so unsullied was the marble hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So through the crystal polish, liquid fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran the dark veins, that none but feet divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could e’er have touch’d there. Sounds Æolian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breathed from the hinges, as the ample span</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the wide doors disclosed a place unknown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some time to any, but those two alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a few Persian mutes, who that same year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were seen about the markets: none knew where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could inhabit; the most curious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were foil’d, who watch’d to trace them to their house:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but the flitter-winged verse must tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For truth’s sake, what woe afterwards befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twould humour many a heart to leave them thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shut from the busy world of more incredulous.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="lamia-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Love in a hut, with water and a crust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is⁠—Love, forgive us!⁠—cinders, ashes, dust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love in a palace is perhaps at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More grievous torment than a hermit’s fast:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is a doubtful tale from faery land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard for the non-elect to understand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had Lycius lived to hand his story down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He might have given the moral a fresh frown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or clench’d it quite: but too short was their bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To breed distrust and hate, that make the soft voice hiss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, there, nightly, with terrific glare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love, jealous grown of so complete a pair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hover’d and buzz’d his wings, with fearful roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the lintel of their chamber door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down the passage cast a glow upon the floor.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">For all this came a ruin: side by side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were enthroned, in the even tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a couch, near to a curtaining</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose airy texture, from a golden string,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Floated into the room, and let appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unveil’d the summer heaven, blue and clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt two marble shafts:⁠—there they reposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where use had made it sweet, with eyelids closed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saving a tithe which love still open kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they might see each other while they almost slept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When from the slope side of a suburb hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deafening the swallow’s twitter, came a thrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of trumpets⁠—Lycius started⁠—the sounds fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But left a thought, a buzzing in his head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the first time, since first he harbour’d in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That purple-lined palace of sweet sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spirit pass’d beyond its golden bourn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the noisy world almost forsworn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lady, ever watchful, penetrant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw this with pain, so arguing a want</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of something more, more than her empery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of joys; and she began to moan and sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he mused beyond her, knowing well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That but a moment’s thought is passion’s passing bell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why do you sigh, fair creature?” whisper’d he:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why do you think?” return’d she tenderly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“You have deserted me;⁠—where am I now?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not in your heart while care weighs on your brow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, no, you have dismiss’d me; and I go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From your breast houseless: aye, it must be so.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He answer’d, bending to her open eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he was mirror’d small in paradise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My silver planet, both of eve and morn!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why will you plead yourself so sad forlorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I am striving how to fill my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With deeper crimson, and a double smart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How to entangle, trammel up and snare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your soul in mine, and labyrinth you there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the hid scent in an unbudded rose?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, a sweet kiss⁠—you see your mighty woes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My thoughts! shall I unveil them? Listen then!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What mortal hath a prize, that other men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May be confounded and abash’d withal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lets it sometimes pace abroad majestical,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And triumph, as in thee I should rejoice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the hoarse alarm of Corinth’s voice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let my foes choke, and my friends shout afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While through the thronged streets your bridal car</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wheels round its dazzling spokes.”⁠—The lady’s cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembled; she nothing said, but, pale and meek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arose and knelt before him, wept a rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sorrows at his words; at last with pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beseeching him, the while his hand she wrung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To change his purpose. He thereat was stung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perverse, with stronger fancy to reclaim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her wild and timid nature to his aim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, for all his love, in self despite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against his better self, he took delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Luxurious in her sorrows, soft and new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His passion, cruel grown, took on a hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fierce and sanguineous as ’twas possible</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one whose brow had no dark veins to swell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fine was the mitigated fury, like</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo’s presence when in act to strike</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The serpent⁠—Ha! the serpent! certes, she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was none. She burnt, she loved the tyranny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, all subdued, consented to the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When to the bridal he should lead his paramour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whispering in midnight silence, said the youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sure some sweet name thou hast, though, by my truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have not ask’d it, ever thinking thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not mortal, but of heavenly progeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As still I do. Hast any mortal name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit appellation for this dazzling frame?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or friends or kinsfolk on the citied earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To share our marriage feast and nuptial mirth?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I have no friends,” said Lamia, “no, not one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My presence in wide Corinth hardly known:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My parents’ bones are in their dusty urns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sepulchred, where no kindled incense burns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing all their luckless race are dead, save me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I neglect the holy rite for thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as you list invite your many guests;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if, as now it seems, your vision rests</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With any pleasure on me, do not bid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Apollonius⁠—from him keep me hid.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius, perplex’d at words so blind and blank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made close inquiry; from whose touch she shrank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feigning a sleep; and he to the dull shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of deep sleep in a moment was betray’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">It was the custom then to bring away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bride from home at blushing shut of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Veil’d, in a chariot, heralded along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By strewn flowers, torches, and a marriage song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With other pageants: but this fair unknown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not a friend. So being left alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Lycius was gone to summon all his kin,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knowing surely she could never win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His foolish heart from its mad pompousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She set herself, high-thoughted, how to dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The misery in fit magnificence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She did so, but ’tis doubtful how and whence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came, and who were her subtle servitors.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the halls, and to and from the doors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a noise of wings, till in short space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glowing banquet-room shone with wide-arched grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A haunting music, sole perhaps and lone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supportress of the faery-roof, made moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throughout, as fearful the whole charm might fade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh carved cedar, mimicking a glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of palm and plantain, met from either side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High in the midst, in honour of the bride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two palms and then two plantains, and so on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From either side their stems branch’d one to one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All down the aisled place; and beneath all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There ran a stream of lamps straight on from wall to wall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So canopied, lay an untasted feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Teeming with odours. Lamia, regal drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silently paced about, and as she went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pale contented sort of discontent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mission’d her viewless servants to enrich</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fretted splendour of each nook and niche.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the tree-stems, marbled plain at first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came jasper panels; then, anon, there burst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth creeping imagery of slighter trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the larger wove in small intricacies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Approving all, she faded at self-will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shut the chamber up, close, hush’d and still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Complete and ready for the revels rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When dreadful guests would come to spoil her solitude.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The day appear’d, and all the gossip rout.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O senseless Lycius! Madman! wherefore flout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silent-blessing fate, warm cloister’d hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And show to common eyes these secret bowers?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The herd approach’d; each guest, with busy brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arriving at the portal, gazed amain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And enter’d marvelling: for they knew the street,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remember’d it from childhood all complete</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a gap, yet ne’er before had seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That royal porch, that high-built fair demesne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So in they hurried all, mazed, curious and keen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save one, who look’d thereon with eye severe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with calm-planted steps walk’d in austere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas Apollonius: something too he laugh’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though some knotty problem, that had daft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His patient thought, had now begun to thaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And solve and melt:⁠—’twas just as he foresaw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He met within the murmurous vestibule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His young disciple. “ ’Tis no common rule,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius,” said he, “for uninvited guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To force himself upon you, and infest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an unbiddden presence the bright throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of younger friends; yet must I do this wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you forgive me.” Lycius blush’d, and led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old man through the inner doors broadspread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With reconciling words and courteous mien</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turning into sweet milk the sophist’s spleen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Of wealthy lustre was the banquet-room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill’d with pervading brilliance and perfume:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before each lucid panel fuming stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A censer fed with myrrh and spiced wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each by a sacred tripod held aloft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose slender feet wide-swerved upon the soft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wool-woofed carpets: fifty wreaths of smoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From fifty censers their light voyage took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the high roof, still mimick’d as they rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the mirror’d walls by twin-clouds odorous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve sphered tables, by silk seats inspher’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High as the level of a man’s breast rear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On libbard’s paws, upheld the heavy gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of cups and goblets, and the store thrice told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ceres’ horn, and, in huge vessels, wine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came from the gloomy tun with merry shine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus loaded with a feast the tables stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each shrining in the midst the image of a God.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">When in an antechamber every guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had felt the cold full sponge to pleasure press’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By ministering slaves, upon his hands and feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fragrant oils with ceremony meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pour’d on his hair, they all moved to the feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In white robes, and themselves in order placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around the silken couches, wondering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence all this mighty cost and blaze of wealth could spring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Soft went the music the soft air along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While fluent Greek a vowel’d under-song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept up among the guests, discoursing low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first, for scarcely was the wine at flow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when the happy vintage touch’d their brains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Louder they talk, and louder come the strains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of powerful instruments:⁠—the gorgeous dyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The space, the splendour of the draperies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The roof of awful richness, nectarous cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful slaves, and Lamia’s self, appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, when the wine has done its rosy deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every soul from human trammels freed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more so strange; for merry wine, sweet wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will make Elysian shades not too fair, too divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon was God Bacchus at meridian height;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flush’d were their cheeks, and bright eyes double bright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Garlands of every green, and every scent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From vales deflower’d, or forest-trees branch-rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In baskets of bright osier’d gold were brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High as the handles heap’d, to suit the thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every guest: that each, as he did please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might fancy-fit his brows, silk-pillow’d at his ease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">What wreath for Lamia? What for Lycius?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What for the sage, old Apollonius?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her aching forehead be there hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The leaves of willow and of adder’s tongue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for the youth, quick, let us strip for him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thyrsus, that his watching eyes may swim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into forgetfulness; and, for the sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let spear-grass and the spiteful thistle wage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>War on his temples. Do not all charms fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the mere touch of cold philosophy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was an awful rainbow once in heaven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We know her woof, her texture; she is given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the dull catalogue of common things.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Philosophy will clip an Angel’s wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conquer all mysteries by rule and line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empty the haunted air, and gnomed mine⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unweave a rainbow, as it erewhile made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tender-person’d Lamia melt into a shade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">By her glad Lycius sitting, in chief place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce saw in all the room another face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, checking his love trance, a cup he took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full brimm’d, and opposite sent forth a look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Cross the broad table, to beseech a glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his old teacher’s wrinkled countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pledge him. The bald-head philosopher</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had fix’d his eye, without a twinkle or stir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full on the alarmed beauty of the bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brow-beating her fair form, and troubling her sweet pride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius then press’d her hand, with devout touch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As pale it lay upon the rosy couch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas icy, and the cold ran through his veins;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then sudden it grew hot, and all the pains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of an unnatural heat shot to his heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lamia, what means this? Wherefore dost thou start?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Know’st thou that man?” Poor Lamia answer’d not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gazed into her eyes, and not a jot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Own’d they the lovelorn piteous appeal:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More, more he gazed: his human senses reel:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some hungry spell that loveliness absorbs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no recognition in those orbs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lamia!” he cried⁠—and no soft-toned reply.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The many heard, and the loud revelry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew hush: the stately music no more breathes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The myrtle sicken’d in a thousand wreaths.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By faint degrees, voice, lute, and pleasure ceased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A deadly silence step by step increased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until it seem’d a horrid presence there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a man but felt the terror in his hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lamia!” he shriek’d; and nothing but the shriek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its sad echo did the silence break.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Begone, foul dream!” he cried, gazing again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the bride’s face, where now no azure vein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wander’d on fair-spaced temples; no soft bloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Misted the cheek; no passion to illume</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deep-recessed vision:⁠—all was blight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lamia, no longer fair, there sat a deadly white.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Shut, shut those juggling eyes, thou ruthless man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn them aside, wretch! or the righteous ban</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the Gods, whose dreadful images</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here represent their shadowy presences,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May pierce them on the sudden with the thorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of painful blindness; leaving thee forlorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In trembling dotage to the feeblest fright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of conscience, for their long-offended might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all thine impious proud-heart sophistries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unlawful magic, and enticing lies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Corinthians! look upon that gray-beard wretch!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark how, possess’d, his lashless eyelids stretch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around his demon eyes! Corinthians, see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sweet bride withers at their potency.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Fool!” said the sophist, in an under-tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gruff with contempt; which a death-nighing moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Lycius answer’d, as heart-struck and lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sank supine beside the aching ghost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Fool! Fool!” repeated he, while his eyes still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Relented not, nor moved; “from every ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life have I preserved thee to this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shall I see thee made a serpent’s prey?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Lamia breathed death breath; the sophist’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a sharp spear, went through her utterly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keen, cruel, perceant, stinging: she, as well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As her weak hand could any meaning tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Motion’d him to be silent; vainly so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He look’d and look’d again a level⁠—No!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“A serpent!” echoed he; no sooner said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than with a frightful scream she vanished:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Lycius’ arms were empty of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As were his limbs of life, from that same night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the high couch he lay!⁠—his friends came round⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supported him⁠—no pulse or breath they found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in its marriage robe, the heavy body wound.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="a-party-of-lovers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Party of Lovers</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Pensive they sit, and roll their languid eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nibble their toast, and cool their tea with sighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else forget the purpose of the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forget their tea⁠—forget their appetite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See with cross’d arms they sit⁠—ah! happy crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire is going out and no one rings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For coals, and therefore no coals Betty brings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fly is in the milk-pot⁠—must he die</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">By a humane society?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, no; there <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Werter takes his spoon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inserts it, dips the handle, and lo! soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little straggler, sav’d from perils dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the teaboard draws a long wet mark.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Arise! take snuffers by the handle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s a large cauliflower in each candle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A winding-sheet, ah me! I must away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To <abbr>No.</abbr> 7, just beyond the circus gay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Alas, my friend! your coat sits very well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where may your Taylor live?” “I may not tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O pardon me⁠—I’m absent now and then.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where <em>might</em> my Taylor live? I say again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot tell, let me no more be teaz’d⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lives in Wapping, <em>might</em> live where he pleas’d.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-autumn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Autumn</h2>
			<section id="to-autumn-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close bosom-friend of the maturing sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conspiring with him how to load and bless</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fruit the vines that round the thatch-eaves run;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bend with apples the moss’d cottage-trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fill all fruit with ripeness to the core;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To swell the gourd, and plump the hazel shells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a sweet kernel; to set budding more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still more, later flowers for the bees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until they think warm days will never cease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For Summer has o’er-brimm’d their clammy cells.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="to-autumn-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Who hath not seen thee oft amid thy store?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes whoever seeks abroad may find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee sitting careless on a granary floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy hair soft-lifted by the winnowing wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or on a half-reap’d furrow sound asleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drowsed with the fume of poppies, while thy hook</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Spares the next swath and all its twined flowers:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometimes like a gleaner thou dost keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Steady thy laden head across a brook;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or by a cider-press, with patient look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou watchest the last oozings, hours by hours.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="to-autumn-3">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Where are the songs of Spring? Ay, where are they?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think not of them, thou hast thy music too,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While barred clouds bloom the soft-dying day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And touch the stubble-plains with rosy hue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then in a wailful choir the small gnats mourn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the river-sallows, borne aloft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or sinking as the light wind lives or dies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full-grown lambs loud bleat from hilly bourn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hedge-crickets sing; and now with treble soft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The redbreast whistles from a garden-croft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And gathering swallows twitter in the skies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-11" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>Sonnet</span>
				<span hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">The Day Is Gone</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The day is gone, and all its sweets are gone!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweet voice, sweet lips, soft hand, and softer breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm breath, light whisper, tender semi-tone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bright eyes, accomplish’d shape, and lang’rous waist!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faded the flower and all its budded charms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faded the sight of beauty from my eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faded the shape of beauty from my arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faded the voice, warmth, whiteness, paradise!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vanish’d unseasonably at shut of eve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the dusk holiday⁠—or holinight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fragrant-curtain’d love begins to weave</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The woof of darkness thick, for hid delight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, as I’ve read love’s missal through to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’ll let me sleep, seeing I fast and pray.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-fanny" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Fanny</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I cry your mercy⁠—pity⁠—love⁠—aye, love!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Merciful love that tantalizes not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One-thoughted, never-wandering, guileless love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unmask’d, and being seen⁠—without a blot!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O! let me have thee whole,⁠—all⁠—all⁠—be mine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That shape, that fairness, that sweet minor zest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of love, your kiss,⁠—those hands, those eyes divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That warm, white, lucent, million-pleasured breast,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yourself⁠—your soul⁠—in pity give me all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Withhold no atom’s atom, or I die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or living on perhaps, your wretched thrall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forget, in the mist of idle misery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life’s purposes⁠—the palate of my mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Losing its gust, and my ambition blind!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lines-to-fanny" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lines to Fanny</h2>
			<p>
				<span>What can I do to drive away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembrance from my eyes? for they have seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aye, an hour ago, my brilliant Queen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touch has a memory. O say, love, say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What can I do to kill it and be free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my old liberty?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When every fair one that I saw was fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough to catch me in but half a snare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not keep me there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, howe’er poor or particolour’d things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My muse had wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever ready was to take her course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither I bent her force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unintellectual, yet divine to me;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Divine, I say!⁠—What sea-bird o’er the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is a philosopher the while he goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Winging along where the great water throes?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">How shall I do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To get anew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those moulted feathers, and so mount once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above, above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The reach of fluttering Love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make him cower lowly while I soar?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I gulp wine? No, that is vulgarism,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heresy and schism,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foisted into the canon law of love;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No,⁠—wine is only sweet to happy men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More dismal cares</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seize on me unawares,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where shall I learn to get my piece again?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To banish thoughts of that most hateful land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dungeoner of my friends, that wicked strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they were wreck’d and live a wrecked life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That monstrous region, whose dull rivers pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever from their sordid urns unto the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unown’d of any weedy-haired gods;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose winds, all zephyrless, hold scourging rods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iced in the great lakes, to afflict mankind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose rank-grown forests, frosted, black, and blind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would fright a Dryad; whose harsh herbaged meads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make lean and lank the starved ox while he feeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There bad flowers have no scent, birds no sweet song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And great unerring Nature once seems wrong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O, for some sunny spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dissipate the shadows of this hell!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say they are gone,⁠—with the new dawning light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steps forth my lady bright!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, let me once more rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul upon that dazzling breast!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let once again these aching arms be placed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tender gaolers of thy waist!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let me feel that warm breath here and there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spread a rapture in my very hair,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, the sweetness of the pain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me those lips again!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough! Enough! it is enough for me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dream of thee!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hyperion-a-vision" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Hyperion: A Vision</h2>
				<p epub:type="z3998:introductory-note">An attempt at remodelling the fragment of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Hyperion</i> into the form of a vision.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="hyperion-a-vision-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h3>
				<p>
					<span>Fanatics have their dreams, wherewith they weave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A paradise for a sect; the savage, too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From forth the loftiest fashion of his sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guesses at heaven; pity these have not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trac’d upon vellum or wild Indian leaf</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shadows of melodious utterance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bare of laurel they live, dream, and die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Poesy alone can tell her dreams,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the fine spell of words alone can save</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imagination from the sable chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dumb enchantment. Who alive can say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou art no Poet⁠—may’st not tell thy dreams?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since every man whose soul is not a clod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath visions and would speak, if he had loved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And been well nurtured in his mother tongue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether the dream now purpos’d to rehearse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be poet’s or fanatic’s will be known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When this warm scribe, my hand, is in the grave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Methought I stood where trees of every clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Palm, myrtle, oak, and sycamore, and beech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With plantane and spice-blossoms, made a screen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In neighbourhood of fountains (by the noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft-showering in mine ears), and (by the touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of scent) not far from roses. Twining round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw an arbour with a drooping roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of trellis vines, and bells, and larger blooms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like floral censers, swinging light in air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before its wreathed doorway, on a mound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of moss, was spread a feast of summer fruits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, nearer seen, seem’d refuse of a meal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By angel tasted or our Mother Eve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For empty shells were scatter’d on the grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grapestalks but half-bare, and remnants more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet-smelling, whose pure kinds I could not know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still was more plenty than the fabled horn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice emptied could pour forth at banqueting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Proserpine return’d to her own fields,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the white heifers low. And appetite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More yearning than on earth I ever felt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Growing within, I ate deliciously,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after not long, thirsted; for thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood a cool vessel of transparent juice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sipp’d by the wander’d bee, the which I took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pledging all the mortals of the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the dead whose names are in our lips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drank. That full draught is parent of my theme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No Asian poppy nor elixir fine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the soon fading, jealous Caliphat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No poison gender’d in close monkish cell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thin the scarlet conclave of old men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could so have rapt unwilling life away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the fragrant husks and berries crush’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the grass, I struggled hard against</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The domineering potion, but in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cloudy swoon came on, and down I sank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a Silenus on an antique vase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How long I slumber’d ’tis a chance to guess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When sense of life return’d, I started up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if with wings, but the fair trees were gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mossy mound and arbour were no more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I look’d around upon the curved sides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of an old sanctuary, with roof august,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Builded so high, it seem’d that filmed clouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might spread beneath as o’er the stars of heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So old the place was, I remember’d none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The like upon the earth: what I had seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of grey cathedrals, buttress’d walls, rent towers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The superannuations of sunk realms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Nature’s rocks toil’d hard in waves and winds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem’d but the faulture of decrepit things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that eternal domed monument.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the marble at my feet there lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Store of strange vessels and large draperies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which needs had been of dyed asbestos wove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in that place the moth could not corrupt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So white the linen, so, in some, distinct</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran imageries from a sombre loom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in a mingled heap confus’d there lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Robes, golden tongs, censer and chafing-dish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Girdles, and chains, and holy jewelries.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Turning from these with awe, once more I raised</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My eyes to fathom the space every way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The embossed roof, the silent massy range</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of columns north and south, ending in mist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of nothing; then to eastward, where black gates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were shut against the sunrise evermore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to the west I look’d, and saw far off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An image, huge of feature as a cloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At level of whose feet an altar slept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be approach’d on either side by steps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And marble balustrade, and patient travail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To count with toil the innumerable degrees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the altar sober-pac’d I went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repressing haste as too unholy there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, coming nearer, saw beside the shrine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One ministering; and there arose a flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in mid-day the sickening east-wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shifts sudden to the south, the small warm rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melts out the frozen incense from all flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fills the air with so much pleasant health</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even the dying man forgets his shroud;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so that lofty sacrificial fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sending forth Maian incense, spread around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetfulness of everything but bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clouded all the altar with soft smoke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From whose white fragrant curtains thus I heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Language pronounc’d: “If thou canst not ascend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These steps, die on that marble where thou art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy flesh, near cousin to the common dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will parch for lack of nutriment; thy bones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will wither in few years, and vanish so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That not the quickest eye could find a grain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what thou now art on that pavement cold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sands of thy short life are spent this hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no hand in the universe can turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy hourglass, if these gummed leaves be burnt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere thou canst mount up these immortal steps.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard, I look’d: two senses both at once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fine, so subtle, felt the tyranny</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that fierce threat and the hard task proposed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prodigious seem’d the toil; the leaves were yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burning, when suddenly a palsied chill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struck from the paved level up my limbs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was ascending quick to put cold grasp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon those streams that pulse beside the throat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shriek’d, and the sharp anguish of my shriek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stung my own ears; I strove hard to escape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The numbness, strove to gain the lowest step.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slow, heavy, deadly was my pace: the cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew stifling, suffocating at the heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when I clasp’d my hands I felt them not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One minute before death my ic’d foot touch’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lowest stair; and, as it touch’d, life seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pour in at the toes, I mounted up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As once fair angels on a ladder flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the green turf to heaven. “Holy Power,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried I, approaching near the horned shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What am I that should so be saved from death?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What am I that another death come not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To choke my utterance, sacrilegious, here?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said the veiled shadow: “Thou hast felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What ’tis to die and live again before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy fated hour; that thou hadst power to do so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is thine own safety; thou hast dated on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy doom.” “High Prophetess,” said I, “purge off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Benign, if so it please thee, my mind’s film.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“None can usurp this height,” return’d that shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“But those to whom the miseries of the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are misery, and will not let them rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All else who find a haven in the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where they may thoughtless sleep away their days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If by a chance into this fane they come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rot on the pavement where thou rottedst half.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Are there not thousands in the world,” said I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Encourag’d by the sooth voice of the shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Who love their fellows even to the death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who feel the giant agony of the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And more, like slaves to poor humanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Labour for mortal good? I sure should see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Other men here, but I am here alone.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Those whom thou spakest of are no visionaries,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rejoin’d that voice; “they are no dreamers weak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They seek no wonder but the human face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No music but a happy-noted voice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They come not here, they have no thought to come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou art here, for thou art less than they.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What benefit canst thou do, or all thy tribe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the great world? Thou art a dreaming thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fever of thyself: think of the earth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What bliss, even in hope, is there for thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What haven? every creature hath its home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every sole man hath days of joy and pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether his labours be sublime or low⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pain alone, the joy alone, distinct:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only the dreamer venoms all his days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing more woe than all his sins deserve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore, that happiness be somewhat shared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such things as thou art are admitted oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into like gardens thou didst pass erewhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suffer’d in these temples: for that cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou standest safe beneath this statue’s knees.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“That I am favour’d for unworthiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By such propitious parley medicined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sickness not ignoble, I rejoice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, and could weep for love of such award.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So answer’d I, continuing, “If it please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Majestic shadow, tell me where I am,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose altar this, for whom this incense curls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What image this whose face I cannot see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the broad marble knees; and who thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of accent feminine so courteous?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Then the tall shade, in drooping linen veil’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spoke out, so much more earnest, that her breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stirr’d the thin folds of gauze that drooping hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About a golden censer from her hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pendent; and by her voice I knew she shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long-treasured tears. “This temple, sad and lone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is all spar’d from the thunder of a war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foughten long since by giant hierarchy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against rebellion: this old image here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose carved features wrinkled as he fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is Saturn’s; I, Moneta, left supreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sole goddess of this desolation.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had no words to answer, for my tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Useless, could find about its roofed home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No syllable of a fit majesty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make rejoinder to Moneta’s mourn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a silence, while the altar’s blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was fainting for sweet food. I look’d thereon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the paved floor, where nigh were piled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faggots of cinnamon, and many heaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of other crisped spicewood: then again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I look’d upon the altar, and its horns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whiten’d with ashes, and its languorous flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then upon the offerings again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so, by turns, till sad Moneta cried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The sacrifice is done, but not the less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will I be kind to thee for thy good will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My power, which to me is still a curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be to thee a wonder; for the scenes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still swooning vivid through my globed brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an electral changing misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt with these dull mortal eyes behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free from all pain, if wonder pain thee not.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As near as an immortal’s sphered words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could to a mother’s soften were these last:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet I had a terror of her robes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chiefly of the veils that from her brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung pale, and curtain’d her in mysteries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made my heart too small to hold its blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This saw that Goddess, and with sacred hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parted the veils. Then saw I a wan face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not pin’d by human sorrows, but bright-blanch’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By an immortal sickness which kills not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It works a constant change, which happy death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can put no end to; deathwards progressing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To no death was that visage; it had past</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lily and the snow; and beyond these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must not think now, though I saw that face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for her eyes I should have fled away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They held me back with a benignant light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft, mitigated by divinest lids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-clos’d, and visionless entire they seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all external things; they saw me not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in blank splendour beam’d, like the mild moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who comforts those she sees not, who knows not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What eyes are upward cast. As I had found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A grain of gold upon a mountain’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, twing’d with avarice, strain’d out my eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To search its sullen entrails rich with ore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, at the view of sad Moneta’s brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I ask’d to see what things the hollow brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind environ’d: what high tragedy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the dark secret chambers of her skull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was acting, that could give so dread a stress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her cold lips, and fill with such a light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her planetary eyes, and touch her voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a sorrow? “Shade of Memory!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried I, with act adorant at her feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“By all the gloom hung round thy fallen house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By this last temple, by the golden age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By great Apollo, thy dear foster-child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by thyself, forlorn divinity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pale Omega of a wither’d race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me behold, according as thou saidst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What in thy brain so ferments to and fro!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sooner had this conjuration past</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My devout lips, than side by side we stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Like a stunt bramble by a solemn pine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep in the shady sadness of a vale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far sunken from the healthy breath of morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the fiery noon and eve’s one star.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward I look’d beneath the gloomy boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw what first I thought an image huge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to the image pedestall’d so high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Saturn’s temple; then Moneta’s voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came brief upon mine ear. “So Saturn sat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he had lost his realms;” whereon there grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A power within me of enormous ken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see as a god sees, and take the depth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of things as nimbly as the outward eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can size and shape pervade. The lofty theme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those few words hung vast before my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With half-unravell’d web. I sat myself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon an eagle’s watch, that I might see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seeing ne’er forget. No stir of life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was in this shrouded vale,⁠—not so much air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in the zoning of a summer’s day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Robs not one light seed from the feather’d grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But where the dead leaf fell there did it rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stream went noiseless by, still deaden’d more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By reason of the fallen divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spreading more shade; the Naiad ’mid her reeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prest her cold finger closer to her lips.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Along the margin-sand large foot-marks went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No further than to where old Saturn’s feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had rested, and there slept how long a sleep!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Degraded, cold, upon the sodden ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His old right hand lay nerveless, listless, dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unsceptred, and his realmless eyes were closed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While his bowed head seem’d listening to the Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ancient mother, for some comfort yet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">It seem’d no force could wake him from his place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there came one who, with a kindred hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touch’d his wide shoulders, after bending low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With reverence, though to one who knew it not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then came the grieved voice Mnemosyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And griev’d I hearken’d. “That divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom thou saw’st step from yon forlornest wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with slow pace approach our fallen king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is Thea, softest-natured of our brood.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mark’d the Goddess, in fair statuary</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surpassing wan Moneta by the head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her sorrow nearer woman’s tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a list’ning fear in her regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if calamity had but begun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the venom’d cloud of evil days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had spent their malice, and the sullen rear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was with its stored thunder labouring up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One hand she press’d upon that aching spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where beats the human heart, as if just there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though an immortal, she felt cruel pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other upon Saturn’s bended neck</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She laid, and to the level of his ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaning, with parted lips some words she spoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In solemn tenour and deep organ-tone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some mourning words, which in our feeble tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would come in this like accenting; how frail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that large utterance of the early gods!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Saturn, look up! and for what, poor lost king?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have no comfort for thee; no, not one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot say, wherefore thus sleepest thou?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Heaven is parted from thee, and the Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knows thee not, so afflicted, for a god.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Ocean, too, with all its solemn noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has from thy sceptre pass’d; and all the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is emptied of thy hoary majesty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy thunder, captious at the new command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rumbles reluctant o’er our fallen house;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy sharp lightning, in unpractis’d hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scourges and burns our once serene domain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“With such remorseless speed still come new woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That unbelief has not a space to breathe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saturn! sleep on: me thoughtless, why should I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus violate thy slumbrous solitude?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I ope thy melancholy eyes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saturn! sleep on, while at thy feet I weep.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As when upon a tranced summer-night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forests, branch-charmed by the earnest stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dream, and so dream all night without a noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save from one gradual solitary gust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swelling upon the silence, dying off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the ebbing air had but one wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So came these words and went; the while in tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She prest her fair large forehead to the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just where her fallen hair might spread in curls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A soft and silken net for Saturn’s feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long, long these two were postured motionless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like sculpture builded-up upon the grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their own power. A long awful time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I look’d upon them: still they were the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The frozen God still bending to the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sad Goddess weeping at his feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moneta silent. Without stay or prop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my own weak mortality, I bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The load of this eternal quietude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unchanging gloom and the three fixed shapes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ponderous upon my senses, a whole moon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by my burning brain I measured sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her silver seasons shedded on the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every day by day methought I grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More gaunt and ghostly. Oftentimes I pray’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intense, that death would take me from the vale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all its burthens; gasping with despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of change, hour after hour I curs’d myself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until old Saturn rais’d his faded eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And look’d around and saw his kingdom gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the gloom and sorrow of the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that fair kneeling Goddess at his feet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As the moist scent of flowers, and grass, and leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fills forest-dells with a pervading air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Known to the woodland nostril, so the words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Saturn fill’d the mossy glooms around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even to the hollows of time-eaten oaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the windings of the foxes’ hole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sad, low tones, while thus he spoke, and sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange moanings to the solitary Pan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Moan, brethren, moan, for we are swallow’d up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And buried from all godlike exercise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of influence benign on planets pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And peaceful sway upon man’s harvesting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all those acts which Deity supreme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth ease its heart of love in. Moan and wail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moan, brethren, moan; for lo, the rebel spheres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spin round; the stars their ancient courses keep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clouds still with shadowy moisture haunt the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still suck their fill of light from sun and moon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still buds the tree, and still the seashores murmur;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no death in all the universe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No smell of death.⁠—There shall be death. Moan, moan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moan, Cybele, moan; for thy pernicious babes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have chang’d a god into an aching palsy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moan, brethren, moan, for I have no strength left;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weak as the reed, weak, feeble as my voice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! Oh! the pain, the pain of feebleness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moan, moan, for still I thaw; or give me help,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throw down those imps, and give me victory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me hear other groans, and trumpets blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of triumph calm, and hymns of festival,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the gold peaks of heaven’s high-piled clouds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voices of soft proclaim, and silver stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of strings in hollow shells; and there shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful things made new, for the surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the sky-children.” So he feebly ceased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a poor and sickly-sounding pause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methought I heard some old man of the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bewailing earthly loss; nor could my eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ears act with that unison of sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which marries sweet sound with the grace of form,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dolorous accent from a tragic harp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With large limb’d visions. More I scrutinized.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still fixt he sat beneath the sable trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose arms spread straggling in wild serpent forms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With leaves all hush’d; his awful presence there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Now all was silent) gave a deadly lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what I ere while heard: only his lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembled amid the white curls of his beard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They told the truth, though round the snowy locks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung nobly, as upon the face of heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mid-day fleece of clouds. Thea arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stretcht her white arm through the hollow dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pointing somewhither: whereat he too rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a vast giant, seen by men at sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To grow pale from the waves at dull midnight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They melted from my sight into the woods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere I could turn, Moneta cried, “These twain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are speeding to the families of grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, rooft in by black rocks, they waste in pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And darkness, for no hope.” And she spake on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye may read who can unwearied pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward from the antechamber of this dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, even at the open doors, awhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must delay, and glean my memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her high phrase⁠—perhaps no further dare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="hyperion-a-vision-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Mortal, that thou may’st understand aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I humanize my sayings to thine ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making comparisons of earthly things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or thou might’st better listen to the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose language is to thee a barren noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though it blows legend-laden thro’ the trees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In melancholy realms big tears are shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More sorrow like to this, and such like woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too huge for mortal tongue or pen of scribe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Titans fierce, self-hid or prison-bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groan for the old allegiance once more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Listening in their doom for Saturn’s voice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one of the whole eagle-brood still keeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sovereignty, and rule, and majesty:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blazing Hyperion on his orbed fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still sits, still snuffs the incense teeming up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Man to the Sun’s God⁠—yet insecure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as upon the earth dire prodigies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fright and perplex, so also shudders he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not at dog’s howl or gloom-bird’s hated screech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the familiar visiting of one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the first toll of his passing bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or prophesyings of the midnight lamp;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But horrors, portioned to a giant nerve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make great Hyperion ache. His palace bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bastion’d with pyramids of shining gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And touch’d with shade of bronzed obelisks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glares a blood-red thro’ all the thousand courts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arches, and domes, and fiery galleries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all its curtains of Aurorian clouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flash angerly; when he would taste the wreaths</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of incense breath’d aloft from sacred hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of sweets, his ample palate takes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Savour of poisonous brass and metals sick;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore when harbour’d in the sleepy West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the full completion of fair day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For rest divine upon exalted couch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slumber in the arms of melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He paces through the pleasant hours of ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With strides colossal, on from hall to hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While far within each aisle and deep recess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His winged minions in close clusters stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amaz’d, and full of fear; like anxious men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who on a wide plain gather in sad troops,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When earthquakes jar their battlements and towers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even now where Saturn, rous’d from icy trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goes step for step with Thea from yon woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyperion, leaving twilight in the rear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is sloping to the threshold of the West.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither we tend.” Now in clear light I stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reliev’d from the dusk vale. Mnemosyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was sitting on a square-edg’d polish’d stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in its lucid depths reflected pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her priestess’ garments. My quick eyes ran on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From stately nave to nave, from vault to vault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through bow’rs of fragrant and enwreathed light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And diamond-paved lustrous long arcades.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon rush’d by the bright Hyperion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His flaming robes stream’d out beyond his heels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave a roar as if of earthly fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That scar’d away the meek ethereal hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made their dove-wings tremble. On he flared.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="the-cap-and-bells" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>The Cap and Bells</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Or, The Jealousies</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="z3998:annotation">A Faery Tale. Unfinished</p>
			</header>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">In midmost Ind, beside Hydaspes cool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There stood, or hover’d, tremulous in the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A faery city, ’neath the potent rule</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Emperor Elfinan; fam’d ev’rywhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For love of mortal women, maidens fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose lips were solid, whose soft hands were made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a fit mould and beauty, ripe and rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pamper his slight wooing, warm yet staid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He loved girls smooth as shades, but hated a mere shade.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">This was a crime forbidden by the law;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the priesthood of his city wept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ruin and dismay they well foresaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If impious prince no bound or limit kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And faery Zendervester overstept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They wept, he sinn’d, and still he would sin on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They dreamt of sin, and he sinn’d while they slept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vain the pulpit thunder’d at the throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caricature was vain, and vain the tart lampoon.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-3">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Which seeing, his high court of parliament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laid a remonstrance at his Highness’ feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Praying his royal senses to content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves with what in faery land was sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Befitting best that shade with shade should meet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat, to calm their fears, he promised soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From mortal tempters all to make retreat⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ay, even on the first of the new moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An immaterial wife to espouse as heaven’s boon.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-4">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Meantime he sent a fluttering embassy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Pigmio, of Imaus sovereign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To half beg, and half demand, respectfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hand of his fair daughter Bellanaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An audience had, and speeching done, they gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their point, and bring the weeping bride away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom, with but one attendant, safely lain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon their wings, they bore in bright array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While little harps were touch’d by many a lyric fay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-5">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As in old pictures tender cherubim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A child’s soul thro’ the sapphired canvas bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, thro’ a real heaven, on they swim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the sweet princess on her plumaged lair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speed giving to the winds her lustrous hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so she journey’d, sleeping or awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save when, for healthful exercise and air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She chose to “<i xml:lang="fr">promener à l’aile</i>,” or take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pigeon’s somerset, for sport or change’s sake.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-6">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Dear Princess, do not whisper me so loud,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quoth Corallina, nurse and confidant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Do not you see there, lurking in a cloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close at your back, that sly old Crafticant?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He hears a whisper plainer than a rant:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dry up your tears, and do not look so blue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He’s Elfinan’s great state-spy militant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He’s running, lying, flying footman, too⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear mistress, let him have no handle against you!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-7">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Show him a mouse’s tail, and he will guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With metaphysic swiftness, at the mouse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Show him a garden, and with speed no less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He’ll surmise sagely of a dwelling-house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And plot, in the same minute, how to chouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The owner out of it; show him a⁠—” “Peace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Peace! nor contrive thy mistress’ ire to rouse!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Return’d the princess, “my tongue shall not cease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till from this hated match I get a free release.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-8">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ah, beauteous mortal!” “Hush!” quoth Coralline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Really you must not talk of him indeed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“You hush!” replied the mistress, with a shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of anger in her eyes, enough to breed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In stouter hearts than nurse’s fear and dread:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas not the glance itself made nursey flinch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of its threat she took the utmost heed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not liking in her heart an hour-long pinch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a sharp needle run into her back an inch.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-9">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So she was silenced, and fair Bellanaine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Writhing her little body with ennui,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Continued to lament and to complain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Fate, cross-purposing, should let her be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ravish’d away, far from her dear countree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all her feelings should be set at nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In trumping up this match so hastily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With lowland blood; and lowland blood she thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poison, as every stanch true-born Imaian ought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-10">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Sorely she grieved, and wetted three or four</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">White Provence rose-leaves with her faery tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not for this cause;⁠—alas! she had more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad reasons for her sorrow, as appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the famed memoirs of a thousand years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Written by Crafticant, and published</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Parpaglion and <abbr>Co.</abbr>, (those sly compeers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who raked up ev’ry fact against the dead,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Scarab Street, Panthea, at the Jubal’s Head.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-11">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Where, after a long hypercritic howl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the vicious manners of the age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He goes on to expose, with heart and soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What vice in this or that year was the rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backbiting all the world in every page;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With special strictures on the horrid crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Section’d and subsection’d with learning sage,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of faeries stooping on their wings sublime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To kiss a mortal’s lips, when such were in their prime.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-12">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Turn to the copious index, you will find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Somewhere in the column, headed letter B,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The name of Bellanaine, if you’re not blind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then pray refer to the text, and you will see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An article made up of calumny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against this highland princess, rating her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For giving way, so over fashionably,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To this new-fangled vice, which seems a burr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stuck in his moral throat, no coughing e’er could stir.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-13">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">There he says plainly that she loved a man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she around him flutter’d, flirted, toy’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before her marriage with great Elfinan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That after marriage too, she never joy’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In husband’s company, but still employ’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wits to ’scape away to Angle-land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where lived the youth, who worried and annoy’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tender heart, and its warm ardours fann’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To such a dreadful blaze, her side would scorch her hand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-14">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But let us leave this idle tittle-tattle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To waiting-maids, and bed-room coteries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor till fit time against her fame wage battle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poor Elfinan is very ill at ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us resume his subject if you please:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For it may comfort and console him much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rhyme and syllable his miseries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poor Elfinan! whose cruel fate was such,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sat and cursed a bride he knew he could not touch.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-15">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Soon as (according to his promises)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bridal embassy had taken wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vanish’d, bird-like, o’er the suburb trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The emperor, empierced with the sharp sting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love, retired, vex’d and murmuring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like any drone shut from the fair bee-queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his cabinet, and there did fling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His limbs upon the sofa, full of spleen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And damn’d his House of Commons, in complete chagrin.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-16">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“I’ll trounce some of the members,” cried the Prince,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I’ll put a mark against some rebel names,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ll make the Opposition-benches wince,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ll show them very soon, to all their shames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What ’tis to smother up a Prince’s flames;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ministers should join in it, I own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surprises me!⁠—they too at these high games!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Am I an Emperor? Do I wear a crown?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imperial Elfinan, go hang thyself or drown!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-17">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“I’ll trounce ’em!⁠—there’s the square-cut chancellor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His son shall never touch that bishopric;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for the nephew of old Palfior,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ll show him that his speeches made me sick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And give the colonelcy to Phalaric;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tiptoe marquis, moral and gallant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall lodge in shabby taverns upon tick;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for the Speaker’s second cousin’s aunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sha’n’t be maid of honour,⁠—by heaven that she sha’n’t!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-18">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“I’ll shirk the Duke of <abbr>A.</abbr>; I’ll cut his brother;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ll give no garter to his eldest son;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I won’t speak to his sister or his mother!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Viscount <abbr>B.</abbr> shall live at cut-and-run;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But how in the world can I contrive to stun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fellow’s voice, which plagues me worse than any,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stubborn fool, that impudent state-dun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who sets down ev’ry sovereign as a zany,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That vulgar commoner, Esquire Biancopany?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-19">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Monstrous affair! Pshaw! pah! what ugly minx</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will they fetch from Imaus for my bride?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alas! my wearied heart within me sinks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To think that I must be so near allied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To a cold dullard fay,⁠—ah, woe betide!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, fairest of all human loveliness!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet Bertha! what crime can it be to glide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the fragrant plaitings of thy dress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or kiss thine eye, or count thy locks, tress after tress?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-20">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So said, one minute’s while his eyes remain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Half lidded, piteous, languid, innocent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, in a wink, their splendour they regain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sparkling revenge with amorous fury blent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love thwarted in bad temper oft has vent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He rose, he stampt his foot, he rang the bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And order’d some death-warrants to be sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For signature:⁠—somewhere the tempest fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As many a poor fellow does not live to tell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-21">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“At the same time, Eban,”⁠—(this was his page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fay of colour, slave from top to toe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sent as a present, while yet under age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the Viceroy of Zanguebar,⁠—wise, slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His speech, his only words were “yes” and “no,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But swift of look, and foot, and wing was he,)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“At the same time, Eban, this instant go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Hum the soothsayer, whose name I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the fresh arrivals in our empery.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-22">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Bring Hum to me! But stay⁠—here take my ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pledge of favour, that he not suspect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Any foul play, or awkward murdering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho’ I have bowstrung many of his sect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throw in a hint, that if he should neglect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One hour the next shall see him in my grasp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the next after that shall see him neck’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or swallow’d by my hunger-starved asp,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mention (’tis as well) the torture of the wasp.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-23">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">These orders given, the Prince, in half a pet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let o’er the silk his propping elbow slide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caught up his little legs, and, in a fret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell on the sofa on his royal side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The slave retreated backwards, humble-eyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with a slave-like silence closed the door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to old Hum thro’ street and alley hied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He “knew the city,” as we say, of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for short cuts and turns, was nobody knew more.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-24">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">It was the time when wholesale dealers close</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their shutters with a moody sense of wealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But retail dealers, diligent, let loose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gas (objected to on score of health),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Convey’d in little solder’d pipes by stealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make it flare in many a brilliant form,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the powers of darkness it repell’th,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which to the oil-trade doth great scaith and harm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And supersedeth quite the use of the glow-worm.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-25">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Eban, untempted by the pastry-cooks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Of pastry he got store within the palace,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hasty steps, wrapp’d cloak, and solemn looks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Incognito upon his errand sallies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His smelling-bottle ready for the allies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pass’d the hurdy-gurdies with disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vowing he’d have them sent on board the galleys;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just as he made his vow, it ’gan to rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore he call’d a coach, and bade it drive amain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-26">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“I’ll pull the string,” said he, and further said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Polluted Jarvey! Ah, thou filthy hack!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose springs of life are all dried up and dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose linsey-woolsey lining hangs all slack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose rug is straw, whose wholeness is a crack;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And evermore thy steps go clatter-clitter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose glass once up can never be got back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who prov’st, with jolting arguments and bitter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ’tis of modern use to travel in a litter.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-27">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Thou inconvenience! thou hungry crop</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all corn! thou snail-creeper to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who while thou goest ever seem’st to stop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fiddle-faddle standest while you go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ the morning, freighted with a weight of woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto some lazar-house thou journeyest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the evening tak’st a double row</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of dowdies for some dance or party drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides the goods meanwhile thou movest east and west.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-28">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“By thy ungallant bearing and sad mien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An inch appears the utmost thou couldst budge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet at the slightest nod, or hint, or sign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Round to the curb-stone patient dost thou trudge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">School’d in a beckon, learned in a nudge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dull-eyed Argus watching for a fare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quiet and plodding thou dost bear no grudge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whisking tilburies, or phaetons rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Curricles, or mail-coaches, swift beyond compare.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-29">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Philosophizing thus, he pull’d the check,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bade the coachman wheel to such a street,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who turning much his body, more his neck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Louted full low, and hoarsely did him greet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Certes, Monsieur were best take to his feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing his servant can no farther drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For press of coaches, that to-night here meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Many as bees about a straw-capp’d hive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When first for April honey into faint flowers they dive.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-30">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Eban then paid his fare, and tiptoe went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Hum’s hotel; and, as he on did pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With head inclined, each dusky lineament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Show’d in the pearl-paved street as in a glass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His purple vest, that ever peeping was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rich from the fluttering crimson of his cloak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His silvery trousers, and his silken sash</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tied in a burnish’d knot, their semblance took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the mirror’d walls, wherever he might look.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-31">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He smiled at self, and, smiling, show’d his teeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeing his white teeth, he smiled the more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lifted his eyebrows, spurn’d the path beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Show’d teeth again, and smiled as heretofore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until he knock’d at the magician’s door;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, till the porter answer’d, might be seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the clear panel more he could adore,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His turban wreathed of gold, and white, and green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mustachios, ear-ring, nose-ring, and his sabre keen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-32">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Does not your master give a rout to-night?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quoth the dark page; “Oh, no!” return’d the Swiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Next door but one to us, upon the right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The <i xml:lang="fr">Magazin des Modes</i> now open is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the Emperor’s wedding;⁠—and, sir, this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My master finds a monstrous horrid bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he retired, an hour ago I wis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his best beard and brimstone, to explore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cast a quiet figure in his second floor.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-33">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Gad! he’s obliged to stick to business!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For chalk, I hear, stands at a pretty price;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as for aqua vitæ⁠—there’s a mess!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The <i xml:lang="la">dentes sapientiœ</i> of mice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our barber tells me too are on the rise,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tinder’s a lighter article,⁠—nitre pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goes off like lightning,⁠—grains of Paradise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At an enormous figure!⁠—stars not sure!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zodiac will not move without a slight douceur!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-34">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Venus won’t stir a peg without a fee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And master is too partial <i xml:lang="fr">entre nous</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To⁠—” “Hush⁠—hush!” cried Eban, “sure that is he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coming downstairs,⁠—by <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As backwards as he can,⁠—is’t something new?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or is ’t his custom, in the name of fun?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“He always comes down backward, with one shoe”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Return’d the porter⁠—“off, and one shoe on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like, saving shoe for sock or stocking, my mad John!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-35">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">It was indeed the great Magician,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feeling, with careful toe, for every stair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And retrograding careful as he can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Backwards and downwards from his own two pair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Salpietro!” exclaimed Hum, “is the dog there?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He’s always in my way upon the mat!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“He’s in the kitchen, or the Lord knows where,”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replied the Swiss,⁠—“the nasty, yelping brat!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Don’t beat him!” return’d Hum, and on the floor came pat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-36">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Then facing right about, he saw the Page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said; “Don’t tell me what you want, Eban;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Emperor is now in a huge rage,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis nine to one he’ll give you the rattan!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us away!” Away together ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The plain-dress’d sage and spangled blackamoor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor rested till they stood to cool, and fan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breathe themselves at th’ Emperor’s chamber door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Eban thought he heard a soft imperial snore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-37">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“I thought you guess’d, foretold, or prophesied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That’s Majesty was in a raving fit?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“He dreams,” said Hum, “or I have ever lied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he is tearing you, sir, bit by bit.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“He’s not asleep, and you have little wit,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replied the Page, “that little buzzing noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er your palmistry may make of it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comes from a plaything of the Emperor’s choice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From a Man-Tiger-Organ, prettiest of his toys.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-38">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Eban then usher’d in the learned Seer:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Elfinan’s back was turn’d, but, ne’ertheless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both, prostrate on the carpet, ear by ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crept silently, and waited in distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knowing the Emperor’s moody bitterness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eban especially, who on the floor ’gan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tremble and quake to death,⁠—he feared less</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dose of senna-tea, or nightmare Gorgon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the Emperor when he play’d on his Man-Tiger-Organ.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-39">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">They kiss’d nine times the carpet’s velvet face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of glossy silk, soft, smooth, and meadow-green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where the close eye in deep rich fur might trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A silver tissue, scantly to be seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As daisies lurk’d in June-grass, buds in green;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sudden the music ceased, sudden the hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of majesty, by dint of passion keen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doubled into a common fist, went grand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knock’d down three cut glasses, and his best ink-stand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-40">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XL</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Then turning round, he saw those trembling two:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Eban,” said he, “as slaves should taste the fruits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of diligence, I shall remember you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To-morrow, or next day, as time suits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a finger conversation with my mutes,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begone!⁠—for you, Chaldean! here remain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fear not, quake not, and as good wine recruits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A conjurer’s spirits, what cup will you drain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sherry in silver, hock in gold, or glass’d champagne?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-41">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Commander of the Faithful!” answer’d Hum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“In preference to these, I’ll merely taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thimble-full of old Jamaica rum.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“A simple boon!” said Elfinan, “thou may’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have Nantz, with which my morning-coffee’s laced.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I’ll have a glass of Nantz, then,”⁠—said the Seer,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Made racy⁠—(sure my boldness is misplaced!)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the third part⁠—(yet that is drinking dear!)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the least drop of <i xml:lang="fr">crème de citron</i> crystal clear.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-42">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“I pledge you. Hum! and pledge my dearest love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Bertha!” “Bertha! Bertha!” cried the sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I know a many Berthas!” “Mine’s above</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All Berthas!” sighed the Emperor. “I engage,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said Hum, “in duty, and in vassalage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To mention all the Berthas in the earth;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There’s Bertha Watson,⁠—and Miss Bertha Page,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This famed for languid eyes, and that for mirth,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s Bertha Blount of York,⁠—and Bertha Knox of Perth.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-43">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“You seem to know”⁠—“I do know,” answer’d Hum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Your Majesty’s in love with some fine girl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Named Bertha; but her surname will not come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without a little conjuring.” “ ’Tis Pearl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis Bertha Pearl! What makes my brain so whirl?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she is softer, fairer than her name!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Where does she live?” ask’d Hum. “Her fair locks curl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So brightly, they put all our fays to shame!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Live?⁠—O! at Canterbury, with her old grand dame.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-44">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Good! good!” cried Hum, “I’ve known her from a child!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She is a changeling of my management;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was born at midnight in an Indian wild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her mother’s screams with the striped tiger’s blent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While the torch-bearing slaves a halloo sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the jungles; and her palanquin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rested amid the desert’s dreariment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shook with her agony, till fair were seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little Bertha’s eyes ope on the stars serene.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-45">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“I can’t say,” said the monarch, “that may be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just as it happen’d, true or else a bam!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drink up your brandy, and sit down by me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feel, feel my pulse, how much in love I am;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if your science is not all a sham,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me some means to get the lady here.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Upon my honour!” said the son of Cham,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“She is my dainty changeling, near and dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although her story sounds at first a little queer.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-46">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Convey her to me, Hum, or by my crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My sceptre, and my cross-surmounted globe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ll knock you⁠—” “Does your majesty mean⁠—<em>down?</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No, no, you never could my feelings probe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To such a depth!” The Emperor took his robe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wept upon its purple palatine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While Hum continued, shamming half a sob,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“In Canterbury doth your lady shine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let me cool your brandy with a little wine.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-47">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Whereat a narrow Flemish glass he took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That since belong’d to Admiral De Witt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Admired it with a connoisseuring look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the ripest claret crowned it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, ere the lively head could burst and flit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He turn’d it quickly, nimbly upside down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mouth being held conveniently fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To catch the treasure: “Best in all the town!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, smack’d his moist lips, and gave a pleasant frown.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-48">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! good my Prince, weep not!” And then again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fill’d a bumper. “Great Sire, do not weep!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your pulse is shocking, but I’ll ease your pain.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fetch me that Ottoman, and prithee keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your voice low,” said the Emperor, “and steep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some lady’s-fingers nice in Candy wine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prithee, Hum, behind the screen do peep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the rose-water vase, magician mine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sponge my forehead⁠—so my love doth make me pine.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-49">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ah, cursed Bellanaine!” “Don’t think of her,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rejoin’d the Mago, “but on Bertha muse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, by my choicest best barometer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You shall not throttled be in marriage noose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ve said it, Sire; you only have to choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bertha or Bellanaine.” So saying, he drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the left pocket of his threadbare hose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sampler hoarded slyly, good as new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holding it by his thumb and finger full in view.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-50">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">L</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Sire, this is Bertha Pearl’s neat handywork,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her <em>name</em>, see here, <em>Midsummer, ninety-one</em>’⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Elfinan snatch’d it with a sudden jerk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wept as if he never would have done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Honouring with royal tears the poor homespun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon were broider’d tigers with black eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long-tailed pheasants, and a rising sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plenty of posies, great stags, butterflies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bigger than stags⁠—a moon⁠—with other mysteries.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-51">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The monarch handled o’er and o’er again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These day-school hieroglyphics with a sigh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Somewhat in sadness, but pleased in the main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till this oracular couplet met his eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Astounded⁠—<em>Cupid, I do thee defy!</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was too much. He shrunk back in his chair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grew pale as death and fainted⁠—very nigh!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Pho! nonsense!” exclaim’d Hum, “now don’t despair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She does not mean it really. Cheer up, hearty⁠—there!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-52">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“And listen to my words. You say you won’t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On any terms, marry Miss Bellanaine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It goes against your conscience⁠—good! well, don’t.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You say, you love a mortal. I would fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Persuade your honour’s highness to refrain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From peccadilloes. But, Sire, as I say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What good would that do? And, to be more plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You would do me a mischief some odd day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cut off my ears and hands, or head too, by my fay!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-53">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Besides, manners forbid that I should pass any</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vile strictures on the conduct of a prince</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who should indulge his genius, if he has any,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not, like a subject, foolish matter mince.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now I think on ’t, perhaps I could convince</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your Majesty there is no crime at all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In loving pretty little Bertha, since</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She’s very delicate⁠—not over tall,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fairy’s hand, and in the waist why⁠—very small.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-54">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ring the repeater, gentle Hum!” “ ’Tis five,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said gentle Hum; “the nights draw in apace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The little birds I hear are all alive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I see the dawning touch’d upon your face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall I put out the candles, please your Grace?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Do put them out, and, without more ado,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me how I may that sweet girl embrace,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How you can bring her to me.” “That’s for you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great Emperor! to adventure, like a lover true.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-55">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“I fetch her!”⁠—“Yes, an ’t like your Majesty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as she would be frighten’d wide awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To travel such a distance through the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Use of some soft manœuvre you must make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For your convenience, and her dear nerves’ sake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nice way would be to bring her in a swoon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Anon, I’ll tell you what course were best to take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You must away this morning.” “Hum! so soon?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sire, you must be in Kent by twelve o’clock at noon.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-56">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">At this great Caesar started on his feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lifted his wings, and stood attentivewise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those wings to Canterbury you must beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If you hold Bertha as a worthy prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Look in the Almanack⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Moore</i> never lies⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">April the twenty-fourth⁠—this coming day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now breathing its new bloom upon the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will end in <abbr>St.</abbr> Mark’s Eve;⁠—you must away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For on that eve alone can you the maid convey.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-57">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Then the magician solemnly ’gan to frown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that his frost-white eye-brows, beetling low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shaded his deep green eyes, and wrinkles brown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plaited upon his furnace-scorched brow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth from his hood that hung his neck below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lifted a bright casket of pure gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Touch’d a spring-lock, and there in wool or snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Charm’d into ever freezing, lay an old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And legend-leaved book, mysterious to behold.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-58">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Take this same book⁠—it will not bite you, Sire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There, put it underneath your royal arm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though it’s a pretty weight, it will not tire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But rather on your journey keep you warm:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is the magic, this the potent charm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shall drive Bertha to a fainting fit!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the time comes, don’t feel the least alarm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But lift her from the ground, and swiftly flit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to your palace …</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-59">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“What shall I do with that same book?” “Why merely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay it on Bertha’s table, close beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her work-box, and ’twill help your purpose dearly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I say no more.” “Or good or ill betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the wide air to Kent this morn I glide!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exclaim’d the Emperor, “When I return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ask what you will,⁠—I’ll give you my new bride!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And take some more wine. Hum;⁠—O, Heavens! I burn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be upon the wing! Now, now, that minx I spurn!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-60">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Leave her to me,” rejoin’d the magian:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“But how shall I account, illustrious fay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thine imperial absence? Pho! I can</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Say you are very sick, and bar the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To your so loving courtiers for one day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If either of their two Archbishops’ graces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should talk of extreme unction, I shall say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You do not like cold pig with Latin phrases,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which never should be used but in alarming cases.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-61">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Open the window. Hum; I’m ready now!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Zooks!” exclaim’d Hum, as up the sash he drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Behold, your Majesty, upon the brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of yonder hill, what crowds of people!” “Whew!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The monster’s always after something new,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Return’d his Highness, “they are piping hot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see my pigsney Bellanaine. Hum! do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tighten my belt a little,⁠—so, so,⁠—not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too tight,⁠—the book!⁠—my wand!⁠—so, nothing is forgot.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-62">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Wounds! how they shout!” said Hum, “and there,⁠—see, see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’ ambassador’s return’d from Pigmio!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The morning’s very fine,⁠—uncommonly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See, past the skirts of yon white cloud they go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tinging it with soft crimsons! Now below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sable-pointed heads of firs and pines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They dip, move on, and with them moves a glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the forest side! Now amber lines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reach the hill top, and now throughout the valley shines.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-63">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Why, Hum, you’re getting quite poetical!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those <em>nows</em> you managed in a special style.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“If ever you have leisure, Sire, you shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See scraps of mine will make it worth your while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tit-bits for Phœbus!⁠—yes, you well may smile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hark! hark! the bells!” “A little further yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good Hum, and let me view this mighty coil.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then the great Emperor full graceful set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His elbow for a prop, and snuff’d his mignonette.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-64">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The morn is full of holiday: loud bells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With rival clamors ring from every spire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cunningly-station’d music dies and swells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In echoing places; when the winds respire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light flags stream out like gauzy tongues of fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A metropolitan murmur, lifeful, warm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comes from the northern suburbs; rich attire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Freckles with red and gold the moving swarm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While here and there clear trumpets blow a keen alarm.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-65">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And now the fairy escort was seen clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like the old pageant of Aurora’s train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above a pearl-built minster, hovering near;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First wily Crafticant, the chamberlain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Balanced upon his gray-grown pinions twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His slender wand officially reveal’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then black gnomes scattering sixpences like rain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then pages three and three; and next, slave-held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Imaian ’scutcheon bright,⁠—one mouse in argent field.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-66">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Gentlemen pensioners next; and after them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A troop of winged Janizaries flew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then slaves, as presents bearing many a gem;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then twelve physicians fluttering two and two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And next a chaplain in a cassock new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Lords in waiting; then (what head not reels</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For pleasure?)⁠—the fair Princess in full view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Borne upon wings,⁠—and very pleased she feels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have such splendour dance attendance at her heels.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-67">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">For there was more magnificence behind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She waved her handkerchief. “Ah, very grand!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cried Elfinan, and closed the window-blind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“And, Hum, we must not shilly-shally stand,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adieu! adieu! I’m off for Angle-land!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I say, old Hocus, have you such a thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About you,⁠—feel your pockets, I command,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I want, this instant, an invisible ring,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thank you, old mummy!⁠—now securely I take wing.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-68">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Then Elfinan swift vaulted from the floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lighted graceful on the window-sill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under one arm the magic book he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other he could wave about at will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pale was his face, he still look’d very ill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He bow’d at Bellanaine, and said⁠—“Poor Bell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farewell! farewell! and if for ever! still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever fare thee well!”⁠—and then he fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A laughing!⁠—snapp’d his fingers!⁠—shame it is to tell!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-69">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“By ’r Lady! he is gone!” cries Hum, “and I,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(I own it),⁠—have made too free with his wine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Crafticant will smoke me. By-the-bye!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This room is full of jewels as a mine,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dear valuable creatures, how ye shine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometime to-day I must contrive a minute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If Mercury propitiously incline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To examine his scrutoire, and see what’s in it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of superfluous diamonds I as well may thin it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-70">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“The Emperor’s horrid bad; yes, that’s my cue!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some histories say that this was Hum’s last speech;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, being fuddled, he went reeling through</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The corridor, and scarce upright could reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stair-head; that being glutted as a leech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And used, as we ourselves have just now said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To manage stairs reversely, like a peach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too ripe, he fell, being puzzled in his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With liquor and the staircase: verdict⁠—<em>found stone dead</em>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-71">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">This, as a falsehood, Crafticanto treats;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as his style is of strange elegance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gentle and tender, full of soft conceits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Much like our Boswell’s,) we will take a glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At his sweet prose, and, if we can, make dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His woven periods into careless rhyme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, little faery Pegasus! rear⁠—prance⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trot round the quarto⁠—ordinary time!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>March, little Pegasus, with pawing hoof sublime!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-72">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Well, let us see⁠—<em>tenth book and chapter nine</em>,”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus Crafticant pursues his diary:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“ ’Twas twelve o’clock at night, the weather fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Latitude thirty-six; our scouts descry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A flight of starlings making rapidly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards Thibet. <abbr>Mem.</abbr>:⁠—birds fly in the night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From twelve to half-past⁠—wings not fit to fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For a thick fog⁠—the Princess sulky quite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call’d for an extra shawl, and gave her nurse a bite.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-73">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Five minutes before one⁠—brought down a moth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With my new double-barrel⁠—stew’d the thighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made a very tolerable broth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Princess turn’d dainty, to our great surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alter’d her mind, and thought it very nice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing her pleasant, tried her with a pun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She frown’d; a monstrous owl across us flies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About this time,⁠—a sad old figure of fun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bad omen⁠—this new match can’t be a happy one.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-74">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“From two to half-past, dusky way we made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the plains of Gobi,⁠—desert, bleak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld afar off, in the hooded shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of darkness, a great mountain (strange to speak),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spitting, from forth its sulphur-baken peak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fan-shaped burst of blood-red, arrowy fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turban’d with smoke, which still away did reek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Solid and black from that eternal pyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the laden winds that scantly could respire.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-75">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Just upon three o’clock, a falling star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Created an alarm among our troop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kill’d a man-cook, a page, and broke a jar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A tureen, and three dishes, at one swoop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then passing by the Princess, singed her hoop:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could not conceive what Coralline was at,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She clapp’d her hands three times, and cried out ‘Whoop!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some strange Imaian custom. A large bat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came sudden ’fore my face, and brush’d against my hat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-76">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Five minutes thirteen seconds after three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far in the west a mighty fire broke out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conjectured, on the instant, it might be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The city of Balk⁠—’twas Balk beyond all doubt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A griffin, wheeling here and there about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kept reconnoitering us⁠—doubled our guard⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lighted our torches, and kept up a shout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till he sheer’d off⁠—the Princess very scared⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many on their marrow-bones for death prepared.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-77">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“At half-past three arose the cheerful moon⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bivouack’d for four minutes on a cloud⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where from the earth we heard a lively tune</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of tambourines and pipes, severe and loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While on a flowery lawn a brilliant crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cinque-parted danced, some half asleep reposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the green-faned cedars, some did shroud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In silken tents, and ’mid light fragrance dozed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or on the open turf their soothed eyelids closed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-78">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Dropp’d my gold watch, and kill’d a kettledrum⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It went for apoplexy⁠—foolish folks!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left it to pay the piper⁠—a good sum⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(I’ve got a conscience, maugre people’s jokes,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To scrape a little favour; ’gan to coax</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Highness’ pug-dog⁠—got a sharp rebuff⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wish’d a game at whist⁠—made three revokes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turn’d from myself, her partner, in a huff;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Majesty will know her temper time enough.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-79">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“She cried for chess⁠—I play’d a game with her⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Castled her king with such a vixen look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It bodes ill to his Majesty⁠—(refer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the second chapter of my fortieth book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And see what hoity-toity airs she took).</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At half-past four the morn essay’d to beam⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saluted, as we pass’d, an early rook,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Princess fell asleep, and, in her dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Talk’d of one Master Hubert, deep in her esteem.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-80">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“About this time⁠—making delightful way⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shed a quill-feather from my larboard wing⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wish’d, trusted, hoped ’twas no sign of decay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thank Heaven, I’m hearty yet!⁠—’twas no such thing:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At five the golden light began to spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fiery shudder through the bloomed east;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At six we heard Panthea’s churches ring⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The city all his unhived swarms had cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To watch our grand approach, and hail us as we pass’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-81">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“As flowers turn their faces to the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So on our flight with hungry eyes they gaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as we shaped our course, this, that way run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With mad-cap pleasure, or hand-clasp’d amaze:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet in the air a mild-toned music plays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And progresses through its own labyrinth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Buds gather’d from the green spring’s middle-days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They scatter’d⁠—daisy, primrose, hyacinth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or round white columns wreathed from capital to plinth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-82">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Onward we floated o’er the panting streets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That seem’d throughout with upheld faces paved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Look where we will, our bird’s-eye vision meets</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Legions of holiday; bright standards waved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fluttering ensigns emulously craved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our minute’s glance; a busy thunderous roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From square to square, among the buildings raved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when the sea, at flow, gluts up once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The craggy hollowness of a wild-reefed shore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-83">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“And ‘Bellanaine for ever!’ shouted they!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While that fair Princess, from her winged chair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bow’d low with high demeanour, and, to pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their new-blown loyalty with guerdon fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still emptied, at meet distance, here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A plenty horn of jewels. And here I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Who wish to give the devil her due) declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against that ugly piece of calumny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which calls them Highland pebble-stones not worth a fly.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-84">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Still ‘Bellanaine!’ they shouted, while we glide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Slant to a light Ionic portico,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The city’s delicacy, and the pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of our Imperial Basilic; a row</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lords and ladies, on each hand, make show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Submissive of knee-bent obeisance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All down the steps; and, as we enter’d, lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The strangest sight⁠—the most unlook’d-for chance⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things turn’d topsy-turvy in a devil’s dance.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-85">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“ ’Stead of his anxious Majesty and court</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the open doors, with wide saluting eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i xml:lang="fr">Congées</i> and scrape-graces of every sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the smooth routine of gallantries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was seen, to our immoderate surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A motley crowd thick gather’d in the hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lords, scullions, deputy-scullions, with wild cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stunning the vestible from wall to wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the Chief Justice on his knees and hands doth crawl.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-86">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Counts of the palace, and the state purveyor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of moth’s-down, to make soft the royal beds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Common Council and my fool Lord Mayor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marching a-row, each other slipshod treads;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Powder’d bag-wigs and ruffy-tuffy heads</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of cinder wenches meet and soil each other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Toe crush’d with heel ill-natured fighting breeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Frill-rumpling elbows brew up many a bother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fists in the short ribs keep up the yell and pother.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-87">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“A Poet, mounted on the Court-Clown’s back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rode to the Princess swift with spurring heels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And close into her face, with rhyming clack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began a Prothalamion;⁠—she reels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She falls, she faints!⁠—while laughter peals</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over her woman’s weakness. ‘Where!’ cried I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘Where is his Majesty?’ No person feels</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inclined to answer; wherefore instantly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I plunged into the crowd to find him or to die.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-cap-and-bells-88">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Jostling my way I gain’d the stairs, and ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the first landing, where, incredible!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I met, far gone in liquor, that old man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That vile impostor Hum,⁠⸺’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">So far so well,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For we have proved the Mago never fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down stairs on Crafticanto’s evidence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore duly shall proceed to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plain in our own original mood and tense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sequel of this day, though labour ’tis immense!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="to-george-keats-written-in-sickness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span>To George Keats</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">Written in Sickness</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Brother, belov’d if health shall smile again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon this wasted form and fever’d cheek:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If e’er returning vigour bid these weak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And languid limbs their gladsome strength regain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well may thy brow the placid glow retain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of sweet content and thy pleas’d eye may speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The conscious self applause, but should I seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To utter what this heart can feel,⁠—Ah! vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were the attempt! Yet kindest friends while o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My couch ye bend, and watch with tenderness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The being whom your cares could e’en restore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the cold grasp of Death, say can you guess</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The feelings which these lips can ne’er express?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feelings, deep fix’d in grateful memory’s store.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-last-sonnet" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Last Sonnet</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Bright star, would I were steadfast as thou art!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not in lone splendour hung aloft the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watching, with eternal lids apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like Nature’s patient sleepless Eremite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moving waters at their priestlike task</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of pure ablution round earth’s human shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or gazing on the new soft fallen mask</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of snow upon the mountains and the moors:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No⁠—yet still steadfast, still unchangeable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pillow’d upon my fair love’s ripening breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To feel for ever its soft fall and swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Awake for ever in a sweet unrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still, still to hear her tender-taken breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so live ever⁠—or else swoon to death.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
