<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Early Poems</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="supplementary-verse" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Supplementary Verse</h2>
			<p epub:type="z3998:non-fiction z3998:foreword">The collection which follows is not intended to be taken exactly as containing the leavings of Keats’s genius; there are verses in the previous groups which might be placed here, if the intention was to make a marked division between his well-defined poetry and his experiments and mere scintillations; doubtless, too, on any such principle it would be just to take back into the respectability of larger type some of the lines here included. But it seemed wise to put into a subordinate group the poet’s fragmentary and posthumous poems, and those which were plainly the mere playthings of his muse.</p>
			<article id="hyperion-a-vision" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Hyperion: A Vision</h3>
				<p class="TODO">[‘An attempt at remodelling the fragment of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Hyperion</i> into the form of a vision.’]</p>
				<h4>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h4>
				<p>
					<span>Fanatics have their dreams, wherewith they weave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A paradise for a sect; the savage, too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From forth the loftiest fashion of his sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guesses at heaven; pity these have not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trac’d upon vellum or wild Indian leaf</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shadows of melodious utterance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bare of laurel they live, dream, and die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Poesy alone can tell her dreams,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the fine spell of words alone can save</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imagination from the sable chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dumb enchantment. Who alive can say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Thou art no Poet⁠—may’st not tell thy dreams’?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since every man whose soul is not a clod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath visions and would speak, if he had loved,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-412"/>
					<span>And been well nurtured in his mother tongue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether the dream now purpos’d to rehearse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be poet’s or fanatic’s will be known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When this warm scribe, my hand, is in the grave.</span>
					<br/>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Methought I stood where trees of every clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Palm, myrtle, oak, and sycamore, and beech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With plantane and spice-blossoms, made a screen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In neighbourhood of fountains (by the noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft-showering in mine ears), and (by the touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of scent) not far from roses. Twining round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw an arbour with a drooping roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of trellis vines, and bells, and larger blooms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like floral censers, swinging light in air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before its wreathed doorway, on a mound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of moss, was spread a feast of summer fruits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, nearer seen, seem’d refuse of a meal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By angel tasted or our Mother Eve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For empty shells were scatter’d on the grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grapestalks but half-bare, and remnants more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet-smelling, whose pure kinds I could not know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still was more plenty than the fabled horn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice emptied could pour forth at banqueting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Proserpine return’d to her own fields,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the white heifers low. And appetite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More yearning than on earth I ever felt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Growing within, I ate deliciously,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after not long, thirsted; for thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood a cool vessel of transparent juice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sipp’d by the wander’d bee, the which I took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pledging all the mortals of the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the dead whose names are in our lips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drank. That full draught is parent of my theme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No Asian poppy nor elixir fine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the soon fading, jealous Caliphat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No poison gender’d in close monkish cell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thin the scarlet conclave of old men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could so have rapt unwilling life away.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-413"/>
					<span>Among the fragrant husks and berries crush’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the grass, I struggled hard against</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The domineering potion, but in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cloudy swoon came on, and down I sank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a Silenus on an antique vase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How long I slumber’d ’t is a chance to guess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When sense of life return’d, I started up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if with wings, but the fair trees were gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mossy mound and arbour were no more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I look’d around upon the curved sides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of an old sanctuary, with roof august,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Builded so high, it seem’d that filmed clouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might spread beneath as o’er the stars of heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So old the place was, I remember’d none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The like upon the earth: what I had seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of grey cathedrals, buttress’d walls, rent towers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The superannuations of sunk realms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Nature’s rocks toil’d hard in waves and winds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem’d but the faulture of decrepit things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that eternal domed monument.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the marble at my feet there lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Store of strange vessels and large draperies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which needs had been of dyed asbestos wove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in that place the moth could not corrupt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So white the linen, so, in some, distinct</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran imageries from a sombre loom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in a mingled heap confus’d there lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Robes, golden tongs, censer and chafing-dish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Girdles, and chains, and holy jewelries.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Turning from these with awe, once more I raised</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My eyes to fathom the space every way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The embossed roof, the silent massy range</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of columns north and south, ending in mist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of nothing; then to eastward, where black gates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were shut against the sunrise evermore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to the west I look’d, and saw far off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An image, huge of feature as a cloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-414"/>
					<span>At level of whose feet an altar slept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be approach’d on either side by steps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And marble balustrade, and patient travail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To count with toil the innumerable degrees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the altar sober-pac’d I went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repressing haste as too unholy there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, coming nearer, saw beside the shrine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One ministering; and there arose a flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in mid-day the sickening east-wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shifts sudden to the south, the small warm rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melts out the frozen incense from all flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fills the air with so much pleasant health</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even the dying man forgets his shroud;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so that lofty sacrificial fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sending forth Maian incense, spread around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetfulness of everything but bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clouded all the altar with soft smoke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From whose white fragrant curtains thus I heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Language pronounc’d: ‘If thou canst not ascend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These steps, die on that marble where thou art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy flesh, near cousin to the common dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will parch for lack of nutriment; thy bones no</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will wither in few years, and vanish so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That not the quickest eye could find a grain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what thou now art on that pavement cold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sands of thy short life are spent this hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no hand in the universe can turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy hourglass, if these gummed leaves be burnt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere thou canst mount up these immortal steps.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard, I look’d: two senses both at once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fine, so subtle, felt the tyranny</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that fierce threat and the hard task proposed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prodigious seem’d the toil; the leaves were yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burning, when suddenly a palsied chill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struck from the paved level up my limbs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was ascending quick to put cold grasp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon those streams that pulse beside the throat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shriek’d, and the sharp anguish of my shriek</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-415"/>
					<span>Stung my own ears; I strove hard to escape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The numbness, strove to gain the lowest step.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slow, heavy, deadly was my pace: the cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew stifling, suffocating at the heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when I clasp’d my hands I felt them not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One minute before death my ic’d foot touch’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lowest stair; and, as it touch’d, life seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pour in at the toes, I mounted up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As once fair angels on a ladder flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the green turf to heaven. ‘Holy Power,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried I, approaching near the horned shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘What am I that should so be saved from death?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What am I that another death come not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To choke my utterance, sacrilegious, here?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said the veiled shadow: ‘Thou hast felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What ’t is to die and live again before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy fated hour; that thou hadst power to do so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is thine own safety; thou hast dated on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy doom.’ ‘High Prophetess,’ said I, ‘purge off</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Benign, if so it please thee, my mind’s film.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘None can usurp this height,’ return’d that shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘But those to whom the miseries of the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are misery, and will not let them rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All else who find a haven in the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where they may thoughtless sleep away their days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If by a chance into this fane they come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rot on the pavement where thou rottedst half.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Are there not thousands in the world,’ said I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Encourag’d by the sooth voice of the shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Who love their fellows even to the death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who feel the giant agony of the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And more, like slaves to poor humanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Labour for mortal good? I sure should see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Other men here, but I am here alone.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Those whom thou spakest of are no visionaries,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rejoin’d that voice; ‘they are no dreamers weak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They seek no wonder but the human face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No music but a happy-noted voice:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-416"/>
					<span>They come not here, they have no thought to come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou art here, for thou art less than they.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What benefit canst thou do, or all thy tribe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the great world? Thou art a dreaming thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fever of thyself: think of the earth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What bliss, even in hope, is there for thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What haven? every creature hath its home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every sole man hath days of joy and pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether his labours be sublime or low⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pain alone, the joy alone, distinct:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only the dreamer venoms all his days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing more woe than all his sins deserve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore, that happiness be somewhat shared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such things as thou art are admitted oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into like gardens thou didst pass erewhile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suffer’d in these temples: for that cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou standest safe beneath this statue’s knees.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘That I am favour’d for unworthiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By such propitious parley medicined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sickness not ignoble, I rejoice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, and could weep for love of such award.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So answer’d I, continuing, ‘If it please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Majestic shadow, tell me where I am,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose altar this, for whom this incense curls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What image this whose face I cannot see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the broad marble knees; and who thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of accent feminine so courteous?’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then the tall shade, in drooping linen veil’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spoke out, so much more earnest, that her breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stirr’d the thin folds of gauze that drooping hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About a golden censer from her hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pendent; and by her voice I knew she shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long-treasured tears. ‘This temple, sad and lone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is all spar’d from the thunder of a war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foughten long since by giant hierarchy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against rebellion: this old image here,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-417"/>
					<span>Whose carved features wrinkled as he fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is Saturn’s; I, Moneta, left supreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sole goddess of this desolation.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had no words to answer, for my tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Useless, could find about its roofed home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No syllable of a fit majesty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make rejoinder to Moneta’s mourn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a silence, while the altar’s blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was fainting for sweet food. I look’d thereon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the paved floor, where nigh were piled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faggots of cinnamon, and many heaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of other crisped spicewood: then again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I look’d upon the altar, and its horns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whiten’d with ashes, and its languorous flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then upon the offerings again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so, by turns, till sad Moneta cried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘The sacrifice is done, but not the less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will I be kind to thee for thy good will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My power, which to me is still a curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be to thee a wonder; for the scenes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still swooning vivid through my globed brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an electral changing misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt with these dull mortal eyes behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free from all pain, if wonder pain thee not.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As near as an immortal’s sphered words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could to a mother’s soften were these last:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet I had a terror of her robes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chiefly of the veils that from her brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung pale, and curtain’d her in mysteries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made my heart too small to hold its blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This saw that Goddess, and with sacred hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parted the veils. Then saw I a wan face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not pin’d by human sorrows, but bright-blanch’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By an immortal sickness which kills not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It works a constant change, which happy death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can put no end to; death wards progressing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To no death was that visage; it had past</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lily and the snow; and beyond these</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-418"/>
					<span>I must not think now, though I saw that face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for her eyes I should have fled away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They held me back with a benignant light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft, mitigated by divinest lids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-clos’d, and visionless entire they seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all external things; they saw me not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in blank splendour beam’d, like the mild moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who comforts those she sees not, who knows not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What eyes are upward cast. As I had found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A grain of gold upon a mountain’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, twing’d with avarice, strain’d out my eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To search its sullen entrails rich with ore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, at the view of sad Moneta’s brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I ask’d to see what things the hollow brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind environ’d: what high tragedy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the dark secret chambers of her skull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was acting, that could give so dread a stress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her cold lips, and fill with such a light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her planetary eyes, and touch her voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a sorrow? ‘Shade of Memory!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried I, with act adorant at her feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘By all the gloom hung round thy fallen house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By this last temple, by the golden age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By great Apollo, thy dear foster-child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by thyself, forlorn divinity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pale Omega of a wither’d race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me behold, according as thou saidst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What in thy brain so ferments to and fro!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sooner had this conjuration past</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My devout lips, than side by side we stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Like a stunt bramble by a solemn pine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep in the shady sadness of a vale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far sunken from the healthy breath of morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the fiery noon and eve’s one star.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward I look’d beneath the gloomy boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw what first I thought an image huge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to the image pedestall’d so high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Saturn’s temple; then Moneta’s voice</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-419"/>
					<span>Came brief upon mine ear. ‘So Saturn sat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he had lost his realms;’ whereon there grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A power within me of enormous ken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see as a god sees, and take the depth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of things as nimbly as the outward eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can size and shape pervade. The lofty theme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those few words hung vast before my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With half-unravell’d web. I sat myself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon an eagle’s watch, that I might see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seeing ne’er forget. No stir of life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was in this shrouded vale,⁠—not so much air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in the zoning of a summer’s day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Robs not one light seed from the feather’d grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But where the dead leaf fell there did it rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stream went noiseless by, still deaden’d more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By reason of the fallen divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spreading more shade; the Naiad ’mid her reeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prest her cold finger closer to her lips.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Along the margin-sand large foot-marks went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No further than to where old Saturn’s feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had rested, and there slept how long a sleep!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Degraded, cold, upon the sodden ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His old right hand lay nerveless, listless, dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unsceptred, and his realmless eyes were closed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While his bowed head seem’d listening to the Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ancient mother, for some comfort yet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It seem’d no force could wake him from his place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there came one who, with a kindred hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touch’d his wide shoulders, after bending low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With reverence, though to one who knew it not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then came the grieved voice Mnemosyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And griev’d I hearken’d. ‘That divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom thou saw’st step from yon forlornest wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with slow pace approach our fallen king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is Thea, softest-natured of our brood.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mark’d the Goddess, in fair statuary</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-420"/>
					<span>Surpassing wan Moneta by the head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her sorrow nearer woman’s tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a list’ning fear in her regard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if calamity had but begun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the venom’d cloud of evil days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had spent their malice, and the sullen rear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was with its stored thunder labouring up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One hand she press’d upon that aching spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where beats the human heart, as if just there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though an immortal, she felt cruel pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other upon Saturn’s bended neck</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She laid, and to the level of his ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaning, with parted lips some words she spoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In solemn tenour and deep organ-tone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some mourning words, which in our feeble tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would come in this like accenting; how frail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that large utterance of the early gods!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Saturn, look up! and for what, poor lost king?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have no comfort for thee; no, not one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot say, wherefore thus sleepest thou?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Heaven is parted from thee, and the Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knows thee not, so afflicted, for a god.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Ocean, too, with all its solemn noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has from thy sceptre pass’d; and all the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is emptied of thy hoary majesty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy thunder, captious at the new command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rumbles reluctant o’er our fallen house;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy sharp lightning, in unpractis’d hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scourges and burns our once serene domain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘With such remorseless speed still come new woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That unbelief has not a space to breathe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saturn! sleep on: me thoughtless, why should I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus violate thy slumbrous solitude?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I ope thy melancholy eyes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saturn! sleep on, while at thy feet I weep.’</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-421"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As when upon a tranced summer-night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forests, branch-charmed by the earnest stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dream, and so dream all night without a noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save from one gradual solitary gust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swelling upon the silence, dying off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the ebbing air had but one wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So came these words and went; the while in tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She prest her fair large forehead to the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just where her fallen hair might spread in curls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A soft and silken net for Saturn’s feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long, long these two were postured motionless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like sculpture builded-up upon the grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their own power. A long awful time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I look’d upon them: still they were the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The frozen God still bending to the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sad Goddess weeping at his feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moneta silent. Without stay or prop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my own weak mortality, I bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The load of this eternal quietude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unchanging gloom and the three fixed shapes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ponderous upon my senses, a whole moon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by my burning brain I measured sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her silver seasons shedded on the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every day by day methought I grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More gaunt and ghostly. Oftentimes I pray’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intense, that death would take me from the vale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all its burthens; gasping with despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of change, hour after hour I curs’d myself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until old Saturn rais’d his faded eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And look’d around and saw his kingdom gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the gloom and sorrow of the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that fair kneeling Goddess at his feet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As the moist scent of flowers, and grass, and leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fills forest-dells with a pervading air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Known to the woodland nostril, so the words</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Saturn fill’d the mossy glooms around,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-422"/>
					<span>Even to the hollows of time-eaten oaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the windings of the foxes’ hole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sad, low tones, while thus he spoke, and sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange moanings to the solitary Pan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Moan, brethren, moan, for we are swallow’d up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And buried from all godlike exercise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of influence benign on planets pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And peaceful sway upon man’s harvesting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all those acts which Deity supreme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth ease its heart of love in. Moan and wail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moan, brethren, moan; for lo, the rebel spheres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spin round; the stars their ancient courses keep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clouds still with shadowy moisture haunt the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still suck their fill of light from sun and moon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still buds the tree, and still the seashores murmur;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no death in all the universe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No smell of death.⁠—There shall be death. Moan, moan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moan, Cybele, moan; for thy pernicious babes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have chang’d a god into an aching palsy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moan, brethren, moan, for I have no strength left;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weak as the reed, weak, feeble as my voice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! Oh! the pain, the pain of feebleness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moan, moan, for still I thaw; or give me help,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throw down those imps, and give me victory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me hear other groans, and trumpets blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of triumph calm, and hymns of festival,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the gold peaks of heaven’s high-piled clouds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voices of soft proclaim, and silver stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of strings in hollow shells; and there shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful things made new, for the surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the sky-children.’ So he feebly ceased.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a poor and sickly-sounding pause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methought I heard some old man of the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bewailing earthly loss; nor could my eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ears act with that unison of sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which marries sweet sound with the grace of form,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dolorous accent from a tragic harp</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-423"/>
					<span>With large limb’d visions. More I scrutinized.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still fixt he sat beneath the sable trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose arms spread straggling in wild serpent forms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With leaves all hush’d; his awful presence there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Now all was silent) gave a deadly lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what I ere while heard: only his lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembled amid the white curls of his beard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They told the truth, though round the snowy locks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung nobly, as upon the face of heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mid-day fleece of clouds. Thea arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stretcht her white arm through the hollow dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pointing somewhither: whereat he too rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a vast giant, seen by men at sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To grow pale from the waves at dull midnight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They melted from my sight into the woods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere I could turn, Moneta cried, ‘These twain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are speeding to the families of grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, rooft in by black rocks, they waste in pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And darkness, for no hope.’ And she spake on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye may read who can unwearied pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Onward from the antechamber of this dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, even at the open doors, awhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must delay, and glean my memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her high phrase⁠—perhaps no further dare.</span>
				</p>
				<h4>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">‘Mortal, that thou may’st understand aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I humanize my sayings to thine ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making comparisons of earthly things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or thou might’st better listen to the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose language is to thee a barren noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though it blows legend-laden thro’ the trees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In melancholy realms big tears are shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More sorrow like to this, and such like woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too huge for mortal tongue or pen of scribe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Titans fierce, self-hid or prison-bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groan for the old allegiance once more,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-424"/>
					<span>Listening in their doom for Saturn’s voice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one of the whole eagle-brood still keeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sovereignty, and rule, and majesty:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blazing Hyperion on his orbed fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still sits, still snuffs the incense teeming up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Man to the Sun’s God⁠—yet insecure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as upon the earth dire prodigies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fright and perplex, so also shudders he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not at dog’s howl or gloom-bird’s hated screech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the familiar visiting of one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the first toll of his passing bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or prophesyings of the midnight lamp;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But horrors, portioned to a giant nerve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make great Hyperion ache. His palace bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bastion’d with pyramids of shining gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And touch’d with shade of bronzed obelisks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glares a blood-red thro’ all the thousand courts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arches, and domes, and fiery galleries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all its curtains of Aurorian clouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flash angerly; when he would taste the wreaths</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of incense breath’d aloft from sacred hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of sweets, his ample palate takes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Savour of poisonous brass and metals sick;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore when harbour’d in the sleepy West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the full completion of fair day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For rest divine upon exalted couch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slumber in the arms of melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He paces through the pleasant hours of ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With strides colossal, on from hall to hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While far within each aisle and deep recess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His winged minions in close clusters stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amaz’d, and full of fear; like anxious men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who on a wide plain gather in sad troops,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When earthquakes jar their battlements and towers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even now where Saturn, rous’d from icy trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goes step for step with Thea from yon woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyperion, leaving twilight in the rear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is sloping to the threshold of the West.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-425"/>
					<span>Thither we tend.’ Now in clear light I stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reliev’d from the dusk vale. Mnemosyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was sitting on a square-edg’d polish’d stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in its lucid depths reflected pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her priestess’ garments. My quick eyes ran on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From stately nave to nave, from vault to vault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through bow’rs of fragrant and enwreathed light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And diamond-paved lustrous long arcades.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon rush’d by the bright Hyperion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His flaming robes stream’d out beyond his heels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave a roar as if of earthly fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That scar’d away the meek ethereal hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made their dove-wings tremble. On he flared.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<section id="fragments" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Fragments</h3>
				<article id="wheres-the-poet-show-him-show-him" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">‘Where’s the Poet? Show Him! Show Him’</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Where’s the Poet? Show him! show him,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Muses nine! that I may know him!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’T is the man who with a man</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Is an equal, be he King,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or poorest of the beggar-clan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Or any other wondrous thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A man may be ’twixt ape and Plato;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">’T is the man who with a bird,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wren, or Eagle, finds his way to</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">All its instincts; he hath heard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Lion’s roaring, and can tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">What his horny throat expresseth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to him the Tiger’s yell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Comes articulate and presseth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On his ear like mother-tongue.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="modern-love" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Modern Love</h4>
					<p>
						<span>And what is love? It is a doll dress’d up</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For idleness to cosset, nurse, and dandle;</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-426"/>
						<span>A thing of soft misnomers, so divine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That silly youth doth think to make itself</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divine by loving, and so goes on</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yawning and doting a whole summer long,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till Miss’s comb is made a pearl tiara,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And common Wellingtons turn Romeo boots;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then Cleopatra lives at number seven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Antony resides in Brunswick Square.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fools! if some passions high have warm’d the world,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If Queens and Soldiers have play’d deep for hearts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is no reason why such agonies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should be more common than the growth of weeds.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fools! make me whole again that weighty pearl</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Queen of Egypt melted, and I’ll say</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That ye may love in spite of beaver hats.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="fragment-of-the-castle-builder" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Fragment of ‘The Castle Builder’</h4>
					<p>
						<span>To-night I’ll have my friar⁠—let me think</span>
						<br/>
						<span>About my room⁠—I’ll have it in the pink;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It should be rich and sombre, and the moon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Just in its mid-life in the midst of June</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should look thro’ four large windows and display</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Clear, but for gold-fish vases in the way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their glassy diamonding on Turkish floor;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The tapers keep aside, an hour and more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To see what else the moon alone can show;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While the night-breeze doth softly let us know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My terrace is well bower’d with oranges.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the floor the dullest spirit sees</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A guitar-ribband and a lady’s glove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beside a crumple-leaved tale of love;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A tambour-frame, with Venus sleeping there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All finish’d but some ringlets of her hair;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A viol, bow-strings torn, cross-wise upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A glorious folio of Anacreon;</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-427"/>
						<span>A skull upon a mat of roses lying,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ink’d purple with a song concerning dying;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An hour-glass on the turn, amid the trails</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of passion-flower;⁠—just in time there sails</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A cloud across the moon,⁠—the lights bring in!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And see what more my phantasy can win.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is a gorgeous room, but somewhat sad;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The draperies are so, as tho’ they had</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Been made for Cleopatra’s winding-sheet;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And opposite the stedfast eye doth meet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A spacious looking-glass, upon whose face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In letters raven-sombre, you may trace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Old ‘Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin.’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Greek busts and statuary have ever been</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Held, by the finest spirits, fitter far,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than vase grotesque and Siamesian jar;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therefore ’t is sure a want of Attic taste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I should rather love a Gothic waste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of eyesight on cinque-coloured potter’s clay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than on the marble fairness of old Greece.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My table-coverlits of Jason’s fleece</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And black Numidian sheep-wool should be wrought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gold, black, and heavy, from the Lama brought.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My ebon sofas should delicious be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With down from Leda’s cygnet progeny.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My pictures all Salvator’s, save a few</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Titian’s portraiture, and one, though new,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Haydon’s in its fresh magnificence.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My wine⁠—O good! ’t is here at my desire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I must sit to supper with my friar.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="extracts-from-an-opera" epub:type="chapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Extracts From an Opera</h4>
					<article id="extracts-from-an-opera" epub:type="chapter z3998:lyrics">
						<h5>‘O! Were I One of the Olympian Twelve’</h5>
						<p>
							<span>O! were I one of the Olympian twelve,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Their godships should pass this into a law,⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That when a man doth set himself in toil</span>
							<br/>
							<div class="newpage" id="page-428"/>
							<span>After some beauty veiled far away,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Each step he took should make his lady’s hand</span>
							<br/>
							<span>More soft, more white, and her fair cheek more fair:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And for each briar-berry he might eat,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A kiss should bud upon the tree of love,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And pulp and ripen richer every hour,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To melt away upon the traveller’s lips.</span>
						</p>
					</article>
					<article id="daisys-song" epub:type="chapter z3998:lyrics">
						<h5>Daisy’s Song</h5>
						<p>
							<span>The sun, with his great eye,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sees not so much as I;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And the moon, all silver-proud,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Might as well be in a cloud.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>And O the spring⁠—the spring!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I lead the life of a King!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Couch’d in the teeming grass,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I spy each pretty lass.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>I look where no one dares,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And I stare where no one stares,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And when the night is nigh,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lambs bleat my lullaby.</span>
						</p>
					</article>
					<article id="follys-song" epub:type="chapter z3998:lyrics">
						<h5>Folly’s Song</h5>
						<p>
							<span>When wedding fiddles are a-playing,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i3">Huzza for folly O!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And when maidens go a-Maying,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i3">Huzza, etc.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When a milk-pail is upset,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i3">Huzza, etc.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And the clothes left in the wet,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i3">Huzza, etc.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When the barrel’s set abroach,</span>
							<br/>
							<div class="newpage" id="page-429"/>
							<span class="i3">Huzza, etc.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When Kate Eyebrow keeps a coach,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i3">Huzza, etc.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When the pig is over-roasted,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i3">Huzza, etc.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And the cheese is over-toasted.</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i3">Huzza, etc.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When Sir Snap is with his lawyer.</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i3">Huzza, etc.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And Miss Chip has kiss’d the sawyer;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i3">Huzza, etc.</span>
						</p>
					</article>
					<article id="oh-i-am-frightend-with-most-hateful-thoughts" epub:type="chapter z3998:lyrics">
						<h5>‘Oh, I Am Frighten’d With Most Hateful Thoughts!’</h5>
						<p>
							<span>Oh, I am frighten’d with most hateful thoughts!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Perhaps her voice is not a nightingale’s,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Perhaps her teeth are not the fairest pearl;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Her eye-lashes may be, for aught I know,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Not longer than the May-fly’s small fanhorns;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>There may not be one dimple on her hand;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And freckles many; ah! a careless nurse,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In haste to teach the little thing to walk,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>May have crumpt up a pair of Dian’s legs,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And warpt the ivory of a Juno’s neck.</span>
						</p>
					</article>
					<article id="song-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:lyrics">
						<h5>Song</h5>
						<p>
							<span>The stranger lighted from his steed,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And ere he spake a word,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He seiz’d my lady’s lily hand,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And kiss’d it all unheard.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>The stranger walk’d into the hall,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And ere he spake a word,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He kiss’d my lady’s cherry lips,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And kiss’d ’em all unheard.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>The stranger walk’d into the bower,⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">But my lady first did go⁠,⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ay hand in hand into the bower,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Where my Lord’s roses blow.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>My lady’s maid had a silken scarf,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And a golden ring had she,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And a kiss from the stranger, as off he went</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Again on his palfrey.</span>
						</p>
					</article>
					<article id="asleep-o-sleep-a-little-while-white-pearl" epub:type="chapter z3998:lyrics">
						<h5>‘Asleep! O Sleep a Little While, White Pearl’</h5>
						<p>
							<span>Asleep! O sleep a little while, white pearl</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And let me kneel, and let me pray to thee,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And let me call Heaven’s blessing on thine eyes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And let me breathe into the happy air,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That doth enfold and touch thee all about,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Vows or my slavery, my giving up,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My sudden adoration, my great love!</span>
						</p>
					</article>
				</article>
			</section>
			<section id="familiar-verses" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Familiar Verses</h3>
				<article id="stanzas-to-miss-wylie" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Stanzas to Miss Wylie</h4>
					<p>
						<span>O come, Georgiana! the rose is full blown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The riches of Flora are lavishly strown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The air is all softness, and crystal the streams;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The West is resplendently clothed in beams.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O come! let us haste to the freshening shades,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The quaintly carv’d seats, and the opening glades;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where the faeries are chanting their evening hymns,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the last sun-beam the sylph lightly swims.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And when thou art weary, I’ll find thee a bed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of mosses and flowers to pillow thy head:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there Georgiana I’ll sit at thy feet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While my story of love I enraptur’d repeat.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So fondly I’ll breathe, and so softly I’ll sigh,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou wilt think that some amorous zephyr is nigh;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet no⁠—as I breathe I will press thy fair knee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then thou wilt know that the sigh comes from me.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Ah! why, dearest girl, should we lose all these blisses?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That mortal’s a fool who such happiness misses:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So smile acquiescence, and give me thy hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With love-looking eyes, and with voice sweetly bland.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="epistle-to-john-hamilton-reynolds" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Epistle to John Hamilton Reynolds</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Dear Reynolds! As last night I lay in bed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There came before my eyes that wonted thread</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of shapes, and shadows, and remembrances,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That every other minute vex and please:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Things all disjointed come from north and south,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two Witch’s eyes above a Cherub’s mouth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Voltaire with casque and shield and habergeon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Alexander with his nightcap on;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Old Socrates a-tying his cravat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Hazlitt playing with Miss Edgeworth’s cat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Junius Brutus, pretty well so so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Making the best of ’s way towards Soho.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Few are there who escape these visitings,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perhaps one or two whose lives have patent wings,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thro’ whose curtains peeps no hellish nose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No wild-boar tushes, and no Mermaid’s toes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But flowers bursting out with lusty pride,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And young Æolian harps personify’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some Titian colours touch’d into real life,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sacrifice goes on; the pontiff knife</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gleams in the Sun, the milk-white heifer lows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The pipes go shrilly, the libation flows:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A white sail shows above the green-head cliff,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Moves round the point, and throws her anchor stiff</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The mariners join hymn with those on land.</span>
					</p>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-432"/>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">You know the Enchanted Castle,⁠—it doth stand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon a rock, on the border of a Lake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nested in trees, which all do seem to shake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From some old magic-like Urganda’s sword.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O Phœbus! that I had thy sacred word</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To show this Castle, in fair dreaming wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto my friend, while sick and ill he lies!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">You know it well enough, where it doth seem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A mossy place, a Merlin’s Hall, a dream;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You know the clear Lake, and the little Isles,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The mountains blue, and cold near neighbour rills,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All which elsewhere are but half animate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There do they look alive to love and hate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To smiles and frowns; they seem a lifted mound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above some giant, pulsing underground.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Part of the building was a chosen See,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Built by a banish’d Santon of Chaldee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The other part, two thousand years from him,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was built by Cuthbert de Saint Aldebrim;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then there’s a little wing, far from the Sun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Built by a Lapland Witch turn’d maudlin Nun;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And many other juts of aged stone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Founded with many a mason-devil’s groan.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">The doors all look as if they op’d themselves:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The windows as if latch’d by Fays and Elves,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from them comes a silver flash of light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As from the westward of a Summer’s night;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or like a beauteous woman’s large blue eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gone mad through olden songs and poesies.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">See! what is coming from the distance dim!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A golden Galley all in silken trim!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Three rows of oars are lightning, moment whiles</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the verd’rous bosoms of those isles;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Towards the shade, under the Castle wall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It comes in silence,⁠—now ’t is hidden all.</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-433"/>
						<span>The Clarion sounds, and from a Postern-gate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An echo of sweet music doth create</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A fear in the poor Herdsman who doth bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His beasts to trouble the enchanted spring,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He tells of the sweet music, and the spot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To all his friends, and they believe him not.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">O that our dreamings all, of sleep or wake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would all their colours from the sunset take:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From something of material sublime,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rather than shadow our own soul’s day-time</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the dark void of night. For in the world</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We jostle,⁠—but my flag is not unfurl’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On the Admiral-staff⁠—and so philosophise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I dare not yet! O, never will the prize,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>High reason, and the love of good and ill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be my award! Things cannot to the will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be settled, but they tease us out of thought;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or is it imagination brought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond its proper bound, yet still confin’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lost in a sort of Purgatory blind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cannot refer to any standard law</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of either earth or heaven? It is a flaw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In happiness, to see beyond our bourn.⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It forces us in summer skies to mourn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It spoils the singing of the Nightingale.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Dear Reynolds! I have a mysterious tale,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cannot speak it: the first page I read</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon a Lampit rock of green sea-weed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among the breakers; ’t was a quiet eve,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The rocks were silent, the wide sea did weave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An untumultuous fringe of silver foam</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Along the flat brown sand; I was at home</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And should have been most happy,⁠—but I saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too far into the sea, where every maw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The greater on the less feeds evermore.⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But I saw too distinct into the core</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-434"/>
						<span>Of an eternal fierce destruction,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so from happiness I far was gone.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still am I sick of it, and tho’ to-day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ve gather’d young spring-leaves, and flowers gay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of periwinkle and wild strawberry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still do I that most fierce destruction see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Shark at savage prey,⁠—the Hawk at pounce,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The gentle Robin, like a Pard or Ounce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ravening a worm,⁠—Away, ye horrid moods!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Moods of one’s mind! You know I hate them well.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You know I’d sooner be a clapping Bell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To some Kamschatkan Missionary Church,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than with these horrid moods be left i’ the lurch.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="a-draught-of-sunshine" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">A Draught of Sunshine</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Hence Burgundy, Claret, and Port,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Away with old Hock and Madeira,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too earthly ye are for my sport;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">There’s a beverage brighter and clearer.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Instead of a pitiful rummer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My wine overbrims a whole summer;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">My bowl is the sky,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And I drink at my eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Till I feel in the brain</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A Delphian pain⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then follow, my Caius! then follow:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">On the green of the hill</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">We will drink our fill</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of golden sunshine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Till our brains intertwine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With the glory and grace of Apollo!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God of the Meridian,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And of the East and West,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To thee my soul is flown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And my body is earthward press’d.⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is an awful mission,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A terrible division;</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-435"/>
						<span>And leaves a gulf austere</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be fill’d with worldly fear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aye, when the soul is fled</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To high above our head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Affrighted do we gaze</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After its airy maze,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As doth a mother wild,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When her young infant child</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is in an eagle’s claws⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And is not this the cause</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of madness?⁠—God of Song,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou bearest me along</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through sights I scarce can bear:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O let me, let me share</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With the hot lyre and thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The staid Philosophy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Temper my lonely hours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let me see thy bowers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More unalarm’d!</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="at-teignmouth" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">At Teignmouth</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Here all the summer could I stay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For there’s Bishop’s teign</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And King’s teign</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Coomb at the clear teign head-</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where close by the stream</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">You may have your cream</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All spread upon barley bread.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">There’s arch Brook</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And there’s larch Brook</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both turning many a mill;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And cooling the drouth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of the salmon’s mouth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fattening his silver gill.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">There is Wild wood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A Mild hood</span>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-436"/>
						<span>To the sheep on the lea o’ the down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where the golden furze</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With its green, thin spurs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth catch at the maiden’s gown.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">There is Newton marsh</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With its spear grass harsh,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A pleasant summer level</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where the maidens sweet</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of the Market Street,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do meet in the dusk to revel.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">There’s the Barton rich</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With dyke and ditch</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hedge for the thrush to live in;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And the hollow tree</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For the buzzing bee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And a bank for the wasp to hive in.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">And O, and O</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The daisies blow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the primroses are waken’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And the violets white</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sit in silver light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the green bud’s as long as the spike end.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Then who would go</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Into dark Soho,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And chatter with dank’d hair’d critics,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">When he can stay</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For the new-mown hay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And startle the dappled crickets?</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="the-devon-maid" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">The Devon Maid</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Where be ye going, you Devon Maid?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And what have ye there in the Basket?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye tight little fairy just fresh from the dairy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Will ye give me some cream if I ask it?</span>
					</p>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-437"/>
					<p>
						<span>I love your Meads, and I love your flowers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And I love your junkets mainly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ’hind the door I love kissing more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">O look not so disdainly.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I love your hills, and I love your dales,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And I love your flocks a-bleating⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But O, on the heather to lie together,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With both our hearts a-beating!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I’ll put your Basket all safe in a nook,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Your shawl I hang up on the willow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And we will sigh in the daisy’s eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And kiss on a grass green pillow.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="acrostic-georgiana-augusta-keats" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="fulltitle">
						<span epub:type="title">Acrostic:</span>
						<span epub:type="subtitle">Georgiana Augusta Keats</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Give me your patience, sister, while I frame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Exact in capitals your golden name;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or sue the fair Apollo and he will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rouse from his heavy slumber and instill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Great love in me for thee and Poesy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Imagine not that greatest mastery</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And kingdom over all the Realms of verse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nears more to heaven in aught, than when we nurse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And surety give to love and Brotherhood.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Anthropophagi in Othello’s mood;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ulysses storm’d and his enchanted belt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Glow with the Muse, but they are never felt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unbosom’d so and so eternal made,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such tender incense in their laurel shade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To all the regent sisters of the Nine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As this poor offering to you, sister mine.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Kind sister! ay, this third name says you are;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enchanted has it been the Lord knows where;</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-438"/>
						<span>And may it taste to you like good old wine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Take you to real happiness and give</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sons, daughters and a home like honied hive.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="meg-merrilies" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Meg Merrilies</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Old Meg she was a Gipsy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And liv’d upon the Moors:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her bed it was the brown heath turf,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And her house was out of doors.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Her apples were swart blackberries,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her currants pods o’ broom;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her wine was dew of the wild white rose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her book a churchyard tomb.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Her Brothers were the craggy hills,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her Sisters larchen trees⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alone with her great family</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She liv’d as she did please.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>No breakfast had she many a morn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">No dinner many a noon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ’stead of supper she would stare</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Full hard against the Moon.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But every morn of woodbine fresh</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She made her garlanding,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And every night the dark glen Yew</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She wove, and she would sing.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And with her fingers old and brown</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She plaited Mats o’ Rushes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gave them to the Cottagers</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She met among the Bushes.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Old Meg was brave as Margaret Queen</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And tall as Amazon:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An old red blanket coat she wore;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A chip hat had she on.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God rest her aged bones somewhere⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She died full long agone!</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="a-song-about-myself" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">A Song About Myself</h4>
					<p>
						<span>There was a naughty Boy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A naughty boy was he,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He would not stop at home,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He could not quiet be⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">He took</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">In his Knapsack</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">A Book</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Full of vowels;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And a shirt</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">With some towels⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">A slight cap</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">For night cap⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">A hair brush,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Comb ditto,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">New Stockings,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">For old ones</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Would split O!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">This Knapsack,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Tight at ’s back,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">He rivetted close</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And follow’d his Nose</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To the North,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To the North,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And follow’d his nose</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To the North.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>There was a naughty boy</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And a naughty boy was he,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For nothing would he do</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But scribble poetry⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">He took</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">An inkstand</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-440"/>
						<span class="i2">In his hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And a Pen</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Big as ten</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">In the other,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And away</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">In a Pother</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">He ran</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To the mountains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And fountains</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And ghostes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And Postes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And witches,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And ditches,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And wrote</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">In his coat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">When the weather</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Was cool,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Fear of gout,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And without</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">When the weather</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Was warm⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Och the charm</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">When we choose</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To follow one’s nose</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To the north,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To the north,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To follow one’s nose</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To the north.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>There was a naughty boy</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And a naughty boy was he,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He kept little fishes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In washing tubs three</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">In spite</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Of the might</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Of the Maid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Nor afraid</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Of his Granny⁠—good⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">He often would,</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-441"/>
						<span class="i2">Hurly burly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Get up early,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And go</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">By hook or crook</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To the brook,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And bring home</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Miller’s thumb,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Tittlebat</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Not over fat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Minnows small</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">As the stall</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Of a glove.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Not above</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">The size</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Of a nice</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Little Baby’s</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Little fingers⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">O, he made,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">’T was his trade,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of Fish a pretty Kettle</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">A Kettle⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">A Kettle</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of Fish, a pretty Kettle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">A Kettle!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>There was a naughty Boy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And a naughty Boy was he,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He ran away to Scotland</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The people for to see⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Then he found</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">That the ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Was as hard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">That a yard</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Was as long,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">That a song</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Was as merry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">That a cherry</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Was as red⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">That lead</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-442"/>
						<span class="i2">Was as weighty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">That fourscore</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Was as eighty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">That a door</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Was as wooden</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">As in England⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">So he stood in his shoes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And he wonder’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">He wonder’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He stood in his shoes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And he wonder’d.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="to-thomas-keats" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem" xml:lang="sco">
					<h4 epub:type="title">To Thomas Keats</h4>
					<p class="TODO">Belantree (for Ballantree) July 10 [1818.]</p>
					<p>
						<span>Ah! ken ye what I met the day</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Out oure the Mountains</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A coming down by craggies gray</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">An mossie fountains⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ah goud-hair’d Marie yeve I pray</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Ane minute’s guessing⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For that I met upon the way</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Is past expressing.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As I stood where a rocky brig</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A torrent crosses</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I spied upon a misty rig</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A troup o’ Horses⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as they trotted down the glen</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I sped to meet them</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To see if I might know the Men</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To stop and greet them.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First Willie on his sleek mare came</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">At canting gallop,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His long hair rustled like a flame</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">On board a shallop,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then came his brother Rab and then</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Young Peggy’s Mither</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-443"/>
						<span>And Peggy too⁠—adown the glen</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">They went togither⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I saw her wrappit in her hood</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Frae wind and raining⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her cheek was flush wi’ timid blood</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Twixt growth and waning⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She turn’d her dazed eyes full oft</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For there her Brithers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Came riding with her Bridegroom soft</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And mony ithers.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Young Tarn came up and eyed me quick</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With reddened cheek⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Braw Tom was daffed like a chick⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He couldna speak⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ah, Marie, they are all gane hame</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Through blustering weather</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An’ every heart is full on flame</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">An’ light as feather.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ah! Marie, they are all gone hame</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Frae happy wadding,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whilst I⁠—Ah is it not a shame?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sad tears am shedding.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="the-gadfly" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">The Gadfly</h4>
					<p>
						<span>All gentle folks who owe a grudge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To any living thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Open your ears and stay your t(r)udge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whilst I in dudgeon sing.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Gadfly he hath stung me sore⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O may he ne’er sting you!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But we have many a horrid bore⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He may sting black and blue.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Has any here an old gray Mare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With three legs all her store,</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-444"/>
						<span>O put it to her Buttocks bare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And straight she’ll run on four.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Has any here a Lawyer suit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of 1743,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Take Lawyer’s nose and put it to ’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And you the end will see.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Is there a Man in Parliament</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dum(b)founder’d in his speech,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O let his neighbour make a rent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And put one in his breech.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O Lowther how much better thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hadst figur’d t’ other day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When to the folks thou mad’st a bow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hadst no more to say.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>If lucky Gadfly had but ta’en</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His seat …</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And put thee to a little pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To save thee from a worse.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Better than Southey it had been,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Better than Mr. D⁠⸺⁠</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Better than Wordsworth, too, I ween,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Better than Mr. V⁠⸺.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Forgive me, pray, good people all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For deviating so⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In spirit sure I had a call⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now I on will go.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Has any here a daughter fair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too fond of reading novels,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too apt to fall in love with care</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And charming Mister Lovels,</span>
					</p>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-445"/>
					<p>
						<span>O put a Gadfly to that thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She keeps so white and pert⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I mean the finger for the ring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And it will breed a wort.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Has any here a pious spouse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who seven times a day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scolds as King David pray’d, to chouse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And have her holy way⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O let a Gadfly’s little sting</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Persuade her sacred tongue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That noises are a common thing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But that her bell has rung.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And as this is the summum bo-</span>
						<br/>
						<span>num of all conquering,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I leave ‘withouten wordes mo’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Gadfly’s little sting.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="on-hearing-the-bag-pipe-and-seeing-the-stranger-played-at-inverary" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">On Hearing the Bag-Pipe and Seeing ‘<i epub:type="se:name.publication.song">The Stranger</i>’ Played at Inverary</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Of late two dainties were before me plac’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sweet, holy, pure, sacred and innocent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From the ninth sphere to me benignly sent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Gods might know my own particular taste:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First the soft Bag-pipe mourn’d with zealous haste,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Stranger next with head on bosom bent</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sigh’d; rueful again the piteous Bag-pipe went,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Again the Stranger sighings fresh did waste.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O Bag-pipe, thou didst steal my heart away⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">O Stranger, thou my nerves from Pipe didst charm⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O Bag-pipe thou didst re-assert thy sway⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Again thou. Stranger, gav’st me fresh alarm⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alas! I could not choose. Ah! my poor heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mum chance art thou with both oblig’d to part.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-446"/>
				<article id="lines-written-in-the-highlands-after-a-visit-to-burnss-country" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Lines Written in the Highlands After a Visit to Burns’s Country</h4>
					<p>
						<span>There is a charm in footing slow across a silent plain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where patriot battle has been fought, where glory had the gain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is a pleasure on the heath where Druids old have been,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where mantles gray have rustled by and swept the nettles green;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is Joy in every spot made known by times of old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>New to the feet, although each tale a hundred times be told;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is a deeper Joy than all, more solemn in the heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More parching to the tongue than all, of more divine a smart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When weary steps forget themselves upon a pleasant turf,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon hot sand, or flinty road, or sea-shore iron scurf,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Toward the Castle or the Cot, where long ago was born</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One who was great through mortal days, and died of fame unshorn.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Light heather-bells may tremble then, but they are far away;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wood-lark may sing from sandy fern,⁠—the Sun may hear his Lay;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Runnels may kiss the grass on shelves and shallows clear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But their low voices are not heard, though come on travels drear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blood-red the sun may set behind black mountain peaks;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blue tides may sluice and drench their time in Caves and weedy creeks;</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-447"/>
						<span>Eagles may seem to sleep wing-wide upon the Air;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ring-doves may fly convuls’d across to some high-cedar’d lair;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But the forgotten eye is still fast lidded to the ground,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Palmer’s, that with weariness, mid-desert shrine hath found.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">At such a time the soul’s a child, in childhood is the brain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forgotten is the worldly heart⁠—alone, it heats in vain.⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aye, if a Madman could have leave to pass a healthful day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To tell his forehead’s swoon and faint when first began decay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He might make tremble many a one whose spirit had gone forth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To find a Bard’s low cradle-place about the silent North.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scanty the hour and few the steps beyond the bourn of Care,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond the sweet and bitter world,⁠—beyond it unaware!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scanty the hour and few the steps, because a longer stay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would bar return, and make a man forget his mortal way:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O horrible! to lose the sight of well remember’d face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Brother’s eyes, of Sister’s brow⁠—constant to every place;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Filling the Air, as on we move, with Portraiture intense;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More warm than those heroic tints that pain a Painter’s sense,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When shapes of old come striding by, and visages of old,</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-448"/>
						<span>Locks shining black, hair scanty gray, and passions manifold.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No, no, that horror cannot be, for at the cable’s length</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Man feels the gentle anchor pull and gladdens in its strength:⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One hour, half-idiot, he stands by mossy water-fall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in the very next he reads his soul’s Memorial:⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He reads it on the mountain’s height, where chance he may sit down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon rough marble diadem⁠—that hill’s eternal Crown.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet be his Anchor e’er so fast, room is there for a prayer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That man may never lose his Mind on Mountains black and bare;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he may stray league after league some great birthplace to find</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And keep his vision clear from speck, his inward sight unblind.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="mrs-cameron-and-ben-nevis" epub:type="chapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Mrs. Cameron and Ben Nevis</h4>
					<p>After all there was one Mrs. Cameron of 50 years of age and the fattest woman in all Inverness-shire who got up this Mountain some few years ago⁠—true she had her servants⁠—but then she had herself. She ought to have hired Sisyphus⁠—‘Up the high hill he heaves a huge round⁠—Mrs. Cameron.’ ’T is said a little conversation took place between the mountain and the Lady. After taking a glass of Whisky as she was tolerably seated at ease she thus began⁠—</p>
					<section epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<h5>
							<abbr class="name">Mrs. C.</abbr>
						</h5>
						<p>
							<span>Upon my life Sir Nevis I am piqued</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That I have so far panted tugg’d and reek’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To do an honor to your old bald pate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And now am sitting on you just to bait,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Without your paying me one compliment.</span>
							<br/>
							<div class="newpage" id="page-449"/>
							<span>Alas, ’t is so with all, when our intent</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is plain, and in the eye of all Mankind</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We fair ones show a preference, too blind!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>You Gentle man immediately turn tail⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O let me then my hapless fate bewail!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ungrateful Baldpate have I not disdain’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The pleasant Valleys⁠—have I not madbrain’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Deserted all my Pickles and preserves</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My China closet too⁠—with wretched Nerves</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To boot⁠—say, wretched ingrate, have I not</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Left my soft cushion chair and caudle pot?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>’T is true I had no corns⁠—no! thank the fates</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My Shoemaker was always Mr, Bates.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And if not Mr. Bates why I’m not old!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Still dumb ungrateful Nevis⁠—still so cold!</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<p>Here the Lady took some more whisky and was putting even more to her lips when she dashed it to the Ground, for the Mountain began to grumble⁠—which continued for a few minutes before he thus began⁠—</p>
					<section epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<h5>Ben Nevis</h5>
						<p>
							<span>What whining bit of tongue and Mouth thus dares</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Disturb my slumber of a thousand years?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Even so long my sleep has been secure⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And to be so awak’d I’ll not endure.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Oh pain⁠—for since the Eagle’s earliest scream</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ve had a damn’d confounded ugly dream,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A Nightmare sure. What! Madam, was it you?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>It cannot be! My old eyes are not true!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Red-Crag, my Spectacles! Now let me see!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Good Heavens! Lady, how the gemini</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Did you get here? O, I shall split my sides!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I shall earthquake⁠—</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<h5>
							<abbr class="name">Mrs. C.</abbr>
						</h5>
						<p>
							<span>Sweet Nevis do not quake, for though I love</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Your honest Countenance all things above,</span>
							<br/>
							<div class="newpage" id="page-450"/>
							<span>Truly I should not like to be convey’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So far into your Bosom⁠—gentle Maid</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Loves not too rough a treatment, gentle Sir⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pray thee be calm and do not quake nor stir</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No, not a Stone, or I shall go in fits⁠—</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<h5>Ben Nevis</h5>
						<p>
							<span>I must⁠—I shall⁠—I meet not such tit bits⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I meet not such sweet creatures every day⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By my old nightcap night and day</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I must have one sweet Buss⁠—I must and shall!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Red Crag!⁠—What! Madam, can you then repent</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of all the toil and vigour you have spent</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To see Ben Nevis and to touch his nose?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Red Crag I say! O I must have them close!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Red Crag, there lies beneath my farthest toe</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A vein of Sulphur⁠—go, dear Red Crag, go⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And rub your flinty back against it⁠—budge!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Dear Madam, I must kiss you, faith I must!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I must embrace you with my dearest gust!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Block-head, d’ ye hear!⁠—Block-head, I’ll make her feel.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>There lies beneath my east leg’s northern heel</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A cave of young earth dragons;⁠—well my boy</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Go thither quick and so complete my joy.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Take you a bundle of the largest pines,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And when the sun on fiercest Phosphor shines,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Fire them and ram them in the Dragon’s nest,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then will the dragons fry and fizz their best</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Until ten thousand now no bigger than</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Poor alligators⁠—poor things of one span⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Will each one swell to twice ten times the size</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of northern whale⁠—then for the tender prize⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The moment then⁠—for then will Red Crag rub</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His flinty back⁠—and I shall kiss and snub</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And press my dainty morsel to my breast.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Block-head make haste!</span>
						</p>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-451"/>
						<p>
							<span class="i3">O Muses, weep the rest⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The Lady fainted and he thought her dead;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So pulled the clouds again about his head</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And went to sleep again; soon she was rous’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By her affrighted servants⁠—next day, hous’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Safe on the lowly ground she bless’d her fate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That fainting fit was not delayed too late.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<p>But what surprised me above all is how the lady got down again. I felt it horribly. ’T was the most vile descent⁠—shook me all to pieces.</p>
				</article>
				<article id="sharing-eves-apple" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Sharing Eve’s Apple</h4>
					<p>
						<span>O blush not so! O blush not so!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Or I shall think you knowing;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if you smile the blushing while,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Then maidenheads are going.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>There’s a blush for won’t, and a blush for shan’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And a blush for having done it:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There’s a blush for thought and a blush for nought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And a blush for just begun it.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O sigh not so! O sigh not so!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For it sounds of Eve’s sweet Pippin;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By these loosen’d lips you have tasted the pips</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And fought in an amorous nipping.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Will you play once more at nice-cut-core,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For it only will last our youth out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And we have the prime of the kissing time,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">We have not one sweet tooth out.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>There’s a sigh for yes, and a sigh for no,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And a sigh for I can’t bear it!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O what can be done, shall we stay or run?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">O cut the sweet apple and share it!</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-452"/>
				<article id="a-prophecy-to-george-keats-in-america" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="fulltitle">
						<span epub:type="title">A Prophecy</span>
						<span epub:type="subtitle">to George Keats in America</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>’T is the witching time of night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Orbed is the moon and bright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the Stars they glisten, glisten,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seeming with bright eyes to listen.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For what listen they?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For a song and for a charm,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>See they glisten in alarm,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the Moon is waxing warm</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hear what I shall say.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Moon! keep wide thy golden ears⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hearken, Stars! and hearken, Spheres!⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hearken, thou eternal Sky!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I sing an infant’s Lullaby,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O pretty lullaby!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Listen, listen, listen, listen,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Glisten, glisten, glisten, glisten,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hear my Lullaby!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though the Rushes, that will make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its cradle, still are in the lake⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though the linen that will be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its swathe, is on the cotton tree⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though the woollen that will keep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It warm, is on the silly sheep⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Listen, Starlight, listen, listen,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Glisten, glisten, glisten, glisten,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hear my lullaby!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Child, I see thee! Child, I’ve found thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Midst of the quiet all around thee!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Child, I see thee! Child, I spy thee!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thy mother sweet is nigh thee!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Child, I know thee! Child no more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But a Poet evermore!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>See, see, the Lyre, the Lyre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In a flame of fire,</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-453"/>
						<span>Upon the little cradle’s top</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flaring, flaring, flaring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Past the eyesight’s bearing.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Awake it from its sleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And see if it can keep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its eyes upon the blaze⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amaze, amaze!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It stares, it stares, it stares,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It dares what no one dares!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It lifts its little hand into the flame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unharm’d, and on the strings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Paddles a little tune, and sings,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With dumb endeavour sweetly⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bard art thou completely!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Little child</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">O’ th’ western wild,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bard art thou completely!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sweetly with dumb endeavour.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A poet now or never,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Little child</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">O’ th’ western wild,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Poet now or never!</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="a-little-extempore" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">A Little Extempore</h4>
					<p>
						<span>When they were come into the Faery’s Court</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They rang⁠—no one at home⁠—all gone to sport</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And dance and kiss and love as faeries do</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Faeries be as humans lovers true.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amid the woods they were so lone and wild,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where even the Robin feels himself exil’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And where the very brooks, as if afraid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hurry along to some less magic shade.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘No one at home!’ the fretful Princess cry’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘And all for nothing such a dreary ride,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all for nothing my new diamond cross;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No one to see my Persian feathers toss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No one to see my Ape, my Dwarf, my Fool,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or how I pace my Otaheitan mule.</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-454"/>
						<span>Ape, Dwarf, and Fool, why stand you gaping there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Burst the door open, quick⁠—or I declare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll switch you soundly and in pieces tear.’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Dwarf began to tremble, and the Ape</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Star’d at the Fool, the Fool was all agape,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Princess grasp’d her switch, but just in time</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The dwarf with piteous face began to rhyme.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘O mighty Princess, did you ne’er hear tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What your poor servants know but too too well?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know you the three great crimes in Faeryland?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The first, alas! poor Dwarf, I understand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I made a whipstock of a faery’s wand;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The next is snoring in their company;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The next, the last, the direst of the three,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is making free when they are not at home.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I was a Prince⁠—a baby prince⁠—my doom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You see, I made a whipstock of a wand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My top has henceforth slept in faery land.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He was a Prince, the Fool, a grown-up Prince,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But he has never been a King’s son since</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He fell a snoring at a faery Ball.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yon poor Ape was a Prince, and he poor thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Picklock’d a faery’s boudoir⁠—now no king</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ape⁠—so pray your highness stay awhile,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’T is sooth indeed, we know it to our sorrow⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Persist and you may be an ape to-morrow.’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While the Dwarf spake, the Princess, all for spite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Peel’d the brown hazel twig to lily white,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Clench’d her small teeth, and held her lips apart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Try’d to look unconcern’d with beating heart.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They saw her highness had made up her mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A-quavering like the reeds before the wind⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And they had had it, but O happy chance!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Ape for very fear began to dance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And grinn’d as all his ugliness did ache⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She staid her vixen fingers for his sake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He was so very ugly: then she took</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her pocket-mirror and began to look</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-455"/>
						<span>First at herself and then at him, and then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She smil’d at her own beauteous face again.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet for all this⁠—for all her pretty face⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She took it in her head to see the place.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Women gain little from experience</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Either in Lovers, husbands, or expense.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The more their beauty the more fortune too⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beauty before the wide world never knew⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So each fair reasons⁠—tho’ it oft miscarries.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She thought <em>her</em> pretty face would please the faeries.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘My darling Ape, I wont whip you to-day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Give me the Picklock sirrah and go play.’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They all three wept but counsel was as vain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As crying cup biddy to drops of rain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet lingering by did the sad Ape forth draw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Picklock from the Pocket in his Jaw.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Princess took it, and dismounting straight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tripp’d in blue silver’d slippers to the gate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And touch’d the wards, the Door full courteous</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Opened⁠—she enter’d with her servants three.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Again it clos’d and there was nothing seen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But the Mule grazing on the herbage green.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="canto-the-xiii" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Canto the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></h4>
					<p>
						<span>The Mule no sooner saw himself alone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than he prick’d up his Ears⁠—and said ‘well done;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At least unhappy Prince I may be free⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No more a Princess shall side-saddle me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O King of Otaheite⁠—tho’ a Mule,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Aye, every inch a King”⁠—tho’ “Fortune’s</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fool,” Well done⁠—for by what Mr. Dwarfy said</span>
						<br/>
						<span>1 would not give a sixpence for her head.’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Even as he spake he trotted in high glee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the knotty side of an old Pollard tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And rubb’d his sides against the mossed bark</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-456"/>
						<span>Till his Girths burst and left him naked stark</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Except his Bridle⁠—how get rid of that</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Buckled and tied with many a twist and plait.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At last it struck him to pretend to sleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then the thievish Monkeys down would creep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And filch the unpleasant trammels quite away.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No sooner thought of than adown he lay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shamm’d a good snore⁠—the Monkey-men descended</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whom they thought to injure they befriended.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They hung his Bridle on a topmost bough</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And off he went run, trot, or anyhow⁠—</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="spenserian-stanzas-on-charles-armitage-brown" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Spenserian Stanzas on Charles Armitage Brown</h4>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">He is to weet a melancholy Carle:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Thin in the waist, with bushy head of hair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As hath the seeded thistle when in parle</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It holds the Zephyr, ere it sendeth fair</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Its light balloons into the summer air;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">There to his beard had not begun to bloom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">No brush had touch’d his chin, or razor sheer;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">No care had touched his cheek with mortal doom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But new he was, and bright, as scarf from Persian loom.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Ne cared he for wine, or half-and-half;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Ne cared he for fish, or flesh, or fowl;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And sauces held he worthless as the chaff;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He’s deigned the swineherd at the wassail bowl;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Ne with lewd ribbalds sat he cheek by jowl;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Ne with sly Lemans in the scorner’s chair;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But after water-brooks this Pilgrim’s soul</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Panted, and all his food was woodland air;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though he would oft-times feast on gilliflowers rare.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">The slang of cities in no wise he knew;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1"><em>Tipping the wink</em> to him was heathen Greek;</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-457"/>
						<span class="i1">He sipp’d no ‘olden Tom,’ or ‘ruin blue,’</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Or Nantz, or cherry-brandy, drunk full meek</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">By many a Damsel hoarse, and rouge of cheek;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor did he know each aged Watchman’s beat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor in obscured purlieus would he seek</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For curled Jewesses, with ankles neat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, as they walk abroad, make tinkling with their feet.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="two-or-three-posies" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">Two or Three Posies</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Two or three Posies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With two or three simples⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three Noses</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With two or three pimples⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three wise men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And two or three ninny’s⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three purses</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And two or three guineas⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three raps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At two or three doors⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three naps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of two or three hours⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three Cats</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And two or three mice⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three sprats</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At a very great price⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three sandies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And two or three tabbies⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three dandies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And two Mrs. ⸺⁠mum!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three Smiles</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And two or three frowns⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three Miles</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To two or three towns⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three pegs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For two or three bonnets⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three dove eggs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hatch into sonnets⁠—</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-458"/>
				<article id="a-party-of-lovers" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">A Party of Lovers</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Pensive they sit, and roll their languid eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nibble their toast, and cool their tea with sighs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or else forget the purpose of the night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forget their tea⁠—forget their appetite.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>See with cross’d arms they sit⁠—ah! happy crew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The fire is going out and no one rings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For coals, and therefore no coals Betty brings.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A fly is in the milk-pot⁠—must he die</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">By a humane society?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No, no; there Mr. Werter takes his spoon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inserts it, dips the handle, and lo! soon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The little straggler, sav’d from perils dark,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Across the teaboard draws a long wet mark.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Arise! take snuffers by the handle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There’s a large cauliflower in each candle.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A winding-sheet, ah me! I must away</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To No. 7, just beyond the circus gay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘Alas, my friend! your coat sits very well;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where may your Taylor live?’ ‘I may not tell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O pardon me⁠—I’m absent now and then.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where <em>might</em> my Taylor live? I say again</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cannot tell, let me no more be teaz’d⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He lives in Wapping, <em>might</em> live where he pleas’d.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="to-george-keats-written-in-sickness" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="fulltitle">
						<span epub:type="title">To George Keats</span>
						<span epub:type="subtitle">Written in Sickness</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Brother, belov’d if health shall smile again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Upon this wasted form and fever’d cheek:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">If e’er returning vigour bid these weak</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And languid limbs their gladsome strength regain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Well may thy brow the placid glow retain</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of sweet content and thy pleas’d eye may speak</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-459"/>
						<span class="i1">The conscious self applause, but should I seek</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To utter what this heart can feel,⁠—Ah! vain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were the attempt! Yet kindest friends while o’er</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My couch ye bend, and watch with tenderness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The being whom your cares could e’en restore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From the cold grasp of Death, say can you guess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The feelings which these lips can ne’er express?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Feelings, deep fix’d in grateful memory’s store.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="on-oxford" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">On Oxford</h4>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">The Gothic looks solemn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">The plain Doric column</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Supports an old Bishop and Crozier;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">The mouldering arch,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Shaded o’er by a larch,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stands next door to Wilson the Hosier.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">Vice,⁠—that is, by turns⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">O’er pale faces mourns</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The black tassell’d trencher and common hat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">The charity boy sings,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">The Steeple-bell rings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as for the Chancellor⁠—<i xml:lang="la">dominat</i>.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">There are plenty of trees,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And plenty of ease,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And plenty of fat deer for Parsons;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And when it is venison,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Short is the benison,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then each on a leg or thigh fastens.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
				<article id="to-a-cat" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title">To a Cat</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Cat! who has[t] pass’d thy grand clima[c]teric,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">How many mice and rats hast in thy days</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Destroy’d?⁠—How many tit-bits stolen? Gaze</span>
						<br/>
						<div class="newpage" id="page-460"/>
						<span>With those bright languid segments green, and prick</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those velvet ears⁠—but pr’ythee do not stick</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy latent talons in me⁠—and upraise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy gentle mew⁠—and tell me all thy frays</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of fish and mice, and rats and tender chick:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay, look not down, nor lick thy dainty wrists</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For all the wheezy asthma,⁠—and for all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy tail’s tip is nick’d off⁠—and though the fists</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of many a maid has given thee many a maul,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still is that fur as soft as when the lists</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In youth thou enter’dst on glass-bottled wall.</span>
					</p>
				</article>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
