<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Cap and Bells; Or, the Jealousies</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-cap-and-bells" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="fulltitle">
				<span epub:type="title">The Cap and Bells</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">Or, the Jealousies</span>
			</h2>
			<p epub:type="z3998:annotation">A Faery Tale. Unfinished</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-1" epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">In midmost Ind, beside Hydaspes cool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There stood, or hover’d, tremulous in the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A faery city, ’neath the potent rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Emperor Elfinan; fam’d ev’rywhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For love of mortal women, maidens fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose lips were solid, whose soft hands were made</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a fit mould and beauty, ripe and rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To pamper his slight wooing, warm yet staid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loved girls smooth as shades, but hated a mere shade.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-2" epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">This was a crime forbidden by the law;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the priesthood of his city wept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ruin and dismay they well foresaw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If impious prince no bound or limit kept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And faery Zendervester overstept;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They wept, he sinn’d, and still he would sin on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They dreamt of sin, and he sinn’d while they slept;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In vain the pulpit thunder’d at the throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caricature was vain, and vain the tart lampoon.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-3" epub:type="z3998:roman">III</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Which seeing, his high court of parliament</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laid a remonstrance at his Highness’ feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Praying his royal senses to content</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Themselves with what in faery land was sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Befitting best that shade with shade should meet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereat, to calm their fears, he promised soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From mortal tempters all to make retreat⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ay, even on the first of the new moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An immaterial wife to espouse as heaven’s boon.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-4" epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Meantime he sent a fluttering embassy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Pigmio, of Imaus sovereign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To half beg, and half demand, respectfully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The hand of his fair daughter Bellanaine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An audience had, and speeching done, they gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their point, and bring the weeping bride away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom, with but one attendant, safely lain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon their wings, they bore in bright array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While little harps were touch’d by many a lyric fay.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-5" epub:type="z3998:roman">V</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">As in old pictures tender cherubim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A child’s soul thro’ the sapphired canvas bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, thro’ a real heaven, on they swim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the sweet princess on her plumaged lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Speed giving to the winds her lustrous hair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so she journey’d, sleeping or awake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save when, for healthful exercise and air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She chose to “<i xml:lang="fr">promener à l’aile</i>,” or take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pigeon’s somerset, for sport or change’s sake.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-6" epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Dear Princess, do not whisper me so loud,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quoth Corallina, nurse and confidant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Do not you see there, lurking in a cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Close at your back, that sly old Crafticant?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He hears a whisper plainer than a rant:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dry up your tears, and do not look so blue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He’s Elfinan’s great state-spy militant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He’s running, lying, flying footman, too⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear mistress, let him have no handle against you!</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-7" epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Show him a mouse’s tail, and he will guess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With metaphysic swiftness, at the mouse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Show him a garden, and with speed no less,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He’ll surmise sagely of a dwelling-house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And plot, in the same minute, how to chouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The owner out of it; show him a⁠—” “Peace!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Peace! nor contrive thy mistress’ ire to rouse!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return’d the princess, “my tongue shall not cease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till from this hated match I get a free release.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-8" epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Ah, beauteous mortal!” “Hush!” quoth Coralline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Really you must not talk of him indeed.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“You hush!” replied the mistress, with a shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of anger in her eyes, enough to breed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In stouter hearts than nurse’s fear and dread:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas not the glance itself made nursey flinch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But of its threat she took the utmost heed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not liking in her heart an hour-long pinch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a sharp needle run into her back an inch.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-9" epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">So she was silenced, and fair Bellanaine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Writhing her little body with ennui,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Continued to lament and to complain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That Fate, cross-purposing, should let her be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ravish’d away, far from her dear countree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That all her feelings should be set at nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In trumping up this match so hastily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With lowland blood; and lowland blood she thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poison, as every stanch true-born Imaian ought.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-10" epub:type="z3998:roman">X</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Sorely she grieved, and wetted three or four</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">White Provence rose-leaves with her faery tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But not for this cause;⁠—alas! she had more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bad reasons for her sorrow, as appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the famed memoirs of a thousand years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Written by Crafticant, and published</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Parpaglion and <abbr>Co.</abbr>, (those sly compeers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who raked up ev’ry fact against the dead,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Scarab Street, Panthea, at the Jubal’s Head.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-11" epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Where, after a long hypercritic howl</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the vicious manners of the age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He goes on to expose, with heart and soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What vice in this or that year was the rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Backbiting all the world in every page;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With special strictures on the horrid crime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Section’d and subsection’d with learning sage,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of faeries stooping on their wings sublime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To kiss a mortal’s lips, when such were in their prime.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-12" epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Turn to the copious index, you will find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Somewhere in the column, headed letter B,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The name of Bellanaine, if you’re not blind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then pray refer to the text, and you will see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An article made up of calumny</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against this highland princess, rating her</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For giving way, so over fashionably,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To this new-fangled vice, which seems a burr</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stuck in his moral throat, no coughing e’er could stir.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-13" epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">There he says plainly that she loved a man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she around him flutter’d, flirted, toy’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before her marriage with great Elfinan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That after marriage too, she never joy’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In husband’s company, but still employ’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her wits to ’scape away to Angle-land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where lived the youth, who worried and annoy’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her tender heart, and its warm ardours fann’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To such a dreadful blaze, her side would scorch her hand.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-14" epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But let us leave this idle tittle-tattle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To waiting-maids, and bed-room coteries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor till fit time against her fame wage battle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poor Elfinan is very ill at ease,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let us resume his subject if you please:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For it may comfort and console him much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To rhyme and syllable his miseries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poor Elfinan! whose cruel fate was such,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat and cursed a bride he knew he could not touch.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-15" epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Soon as (according to his promises)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bridal embassy had taken wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vanish’d, bird-like, o’er the suburb trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The emperor, empierced with the sharp sting</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of love, retired, vex’d and murmuring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like any drone shut from the fair bee-queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into his cabinet, and there did fling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His limbs upon the sofa, full of spleen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And damn’d his House of Commons, in complete chagrin.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-16" epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“I’ll trounce some of the members,” cried the Prince,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I’ll put a mark against some rebel names,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ll make the Opposition-benches wince,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ll show them very soon, to all their shames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What ’tis to smother up a Prince’s flames;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That ministers should join in it, I own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surprises me!⁠—they too at these high games!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Am I an Emperor? Do I wear a crown?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imperial Elfinan, go hang thyself or drown!</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-17" epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“I’ll trounce ’em!⁠—there’s the square-cut chancellor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His son shall never touch that bishopric;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for the nephew of old Palfior,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ll show him that his speeches made me sick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And give the colonelcy to Phalaric;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tiptoe marquis, moral and gallant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall lodge in shabby taverns upon tick;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And for the Speaker’s second cousin’s aunt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sha’n’t be maid of honour,⁠—by heaven that she sha’n’t!</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-18" epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“I’ll shirk the Duke of <abbr>A.</abbr>; I’ll cut his brother;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ll give no garter to his eldest son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I won’t speak to his sister or his mother!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Viscount <abbr>B.</abbr> shall live at cut-and-run;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But how in the world can I contrive to stun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That fellow’s voice, which plagues me worse than any,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That stubborn fool, that impudent state-dun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who sets down ev’ry sovereign as a zany,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That vulgar commoner, Esquire Biancopany?</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-19" epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Monstrous affair! Pshaw! pah! what ugly minx</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will they fetch from Imaus for my bride?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alas! my wearied heart within me sinks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To think that I must be so near allied</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a cold dullard fay,⁠—ah, woe betide!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah, fairest of all human loveliness!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweet Bertha! what crime can it be to glide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About the fragrant plaitings of thy dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or kiss thine eye, or count thy locks, tress after tress?”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-20" epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">So said, one minute’s while his eyes remain’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Half lidded, piteous, languid, innocent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, in a wink, their splendour they regain’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sparkling revenge with amorous fury blent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love thwarted in bad temper oft has vent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He rose, he stampt his foot, he rang the bell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And order’d some death-warrants to be sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For signature:⁠—somewhere the tempest fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As many a poor fellow does not live to tell.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-21" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“At the same time, Eban,”⁠—(this was his page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fay of colour, slave from top to toe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sent as a present, while yet under age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the Viceroy of Zanguebar,⁠—wise, slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His speech, his only words were “yes” and “no,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But swift of look, and foot, and wing was he,)⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“At the same time, Eban, this instant go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Hum the soothsayer, whose name I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the fresh arrivals in our empery.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-22" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Bring Hum to me! But stay⁠—here take my ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pledge of favour, that he not suspect</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Any foul play, or awkward murdering</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tho’ I have bowstrung many of his sect;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throw in a hint, that if he should neglect</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One hour the next shall see him in my grasp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the next after that shall see him neck’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or swallow’d by my hunger-starved asp,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mention (’tis as well) the torture of the wasp.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-23" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">These orders given, the Prince, in half a pet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let o’er the silk his propping elbow slide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Caught up his little legs, and, in a fret,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fell on the sofa on his royal side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The slave retreated backwards, humble-eyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with a slave-like silence closed the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to old Hum thro’ street and alley hied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He “knew the city,” as we say, of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for short cuts and turns, was nobody knew more.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-24" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">It was the time when wholesale dealers close</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their shutters with a moody sense of wealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But retail dealers, diligent, let loose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gas (objected to on score of health),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Convey’d in little solder’d pipes by stealth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make it flare in many a brilliant form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That all the powers of darkness it repell’th,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which to the oil-trade doth great scaith and harm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And supersedeth quite the use of the glow-worm.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-25" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Eban, untempted by the pastry-cooks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Of pastry he got store within the palace,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With hasty steps, wrapp’d cloak, and solemn looks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Incognito upon his errand sallies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His smelling-bottle ready for the allies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He pass’d the hurdy-gurdies with disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vowing he’d have them sent on board the galleys;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Just as he made his vow, it ’gan to rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore he call’d a coach, and bade it drive amain.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-26" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“I’ll pull the string,” said he, and further said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Polluted Jarvey! Ah, thou filthy hack!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose springs of life are all dried up and dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose linsey-woolsey lining hangs all slack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose rug is straw, whose wholeness is a crack;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And evermore thy steps go clatter-clitter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose glass once up can never be got back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who prov’st, with jolting arguments and bitter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ’tis of modern use to travel in a litter.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-27" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Thou inconvenience! thou hungry crop</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all corn! thou snail-creeper to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who while thou goest ever seem’st to stop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fiddle-faddle standest while you go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ the morning, freighted with a weight of woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unto some lazar-house thou journeyest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the evening tak’st a double row</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of dowdies for some dance or party drest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Besides the goods meanwhile thou movest east and west.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-28" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“By thy ungallant bearing and sad mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An inch appears the utmost thou couldst budge:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet at the slightest nod, or hint, or sign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Round to the curb-stone patient dost thou trudge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">School’d in a beckon, learned in a nudge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A dull-eyed Argus watching for a fare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quiet and plodding thou dost bear no grudge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whisking tilburies, or phaetons rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curricles, or mail-coaches, swift beyond compare.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-29" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Philosophizing thus, he pull’d the check,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And bade the coachman wheel to such a street,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who turning much his body, more his neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Louted full low, and hoarsely did him greet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Certes, Monsieur were best take to his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing his servant can no farther drive</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For press of coaches, that to-night here meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many as bees about a straw-capp’d hive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first for April honey into faint flowers they dive.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-30" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Eban then paid his fare, and tiptoe went</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Hum’s hotel; and, as he on did pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With head inclined, each dusky lineament</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Show’d in the pearl-paved street as in a glass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His purple vest, that ever peeping was</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rich from the fluttering crimson of his cloak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His silvery trowsers, and his silken sash</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tied in a burnish’d knot, their semblance took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the mirror’d walls, wherever he might look.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-31" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">He smiled at self, and, smiling, show’d his teeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And seeing his white teeth, he smiled the more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lifted his eyebrows, spurn’d the path beneath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Show’d teeth again, and smiled as heretofore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until he knock’d at the magician’s door;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, till the porter answer’d, might be seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the clear panel more he could adore,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His turban wreathed of gold, and white, and green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mustachios, ear-ring, nose-ring, and his sabre keen.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-32" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Does not your master give a rout to-night?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Quoth the dark page; “Oh, no!” return’d the Swiss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Next door but one to us, upon the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The <i xml:lang="fr">Magazin des Modes</i> now open is</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against the Emperor’s wedding;⁠—and, sir, this</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My master finds a monstrous horrid bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As he retired, an hour ago iwis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With his best beard and brimstone, to explore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cast a quiet figure in his second floor.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-33" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Gad! he’s obliged to stick to business!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For chalk, I hear, stands at a pretty price;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as for aqua vitæ⁠—there’s a mess!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The <i xml:lang="la">dentes sapientiœ</i> of mice</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our barber tells me too are on the rise,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tinder’s a lighter article,⁠—nitre pure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Goes off like lightning,⁠—grains of Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At an enormous figure!⁠—stars not sure!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Zodiac will not move without a slight douceur!</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-34" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Venus won’t stir a peg without a fee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And master is too partial <i xml:lang="fr">entre nous</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To⁠—” “Hush⁠—hush!” cried Eban, “sure that is he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Coming downstairs,⁠—by <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As backwards as he can,⁠—is’t something new?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or is ’t his custom, in the name of fun?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“He always comes down backward, with one shoe”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return’d the porter⁠—“off, and one shoe on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like, saving shoe for sock or stocking, my mad John!”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-35" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">It was indeed the great Magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feeling, with careful toe, for every stair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And retrograding careful as he can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Backwards and downwards from his own two pair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Salpietro!” exclaimed Hum, “is the dog there?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He’s always in my way upon the mat!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“He’s in the kitchen, or the Lord knows where,”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Replied the Swiss,⁠—“the nasty, yelping brat!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Don’t beat him!” return’d Hum, and on the floor came pat.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-36" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then facing right about, he saw the Page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And said; “Don’t tell me what you want, Eban;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Emperor is now in a huge rage,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis nine to one he’ll give you the rattan!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let us away!” Away together ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The plain-dress’d sage and spangled blackamoor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor rested till they stood to cool, and fan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And breathe themselves at th’ Emperor’s chamber door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Eban thought he heard a soft imperial snore.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-37" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“I thought you guess’d, foretold, or prophesied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That’s Majesty was in a raving fit?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“He dreams,” said Hum, “or I have ever lied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That he is tearing you, sir, bit by bit.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“He’s not asleep, and you have little wit,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Replied the Page, “that little buzzing noise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whate’er your palmistry may make of it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Comes from a plaything of the Emperor’s choice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a Man-Tiger-Organ, prettiest of his toys.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-38" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Eban then usher’d in the learned Seer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Elfinan’s back was turn’d, but, ne’ertheless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Both, prostrate on the carpet, ear by ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crept silently, and waited in distress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knowing the Emperor’s moody bitterness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eban especially, who on the floor ’gan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tremble and quake to death,⁠—he feared less</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A dose of senna-tea, or nightmare Gorgon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the Emperor when he play’d on his Man-Tiger-Organ.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-39" epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">They kiss’d nine times the carpet’s velvet face</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of glossy silk, soft, smooth, and meadow-green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the close eye in deep rich fur might trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A silver tissue, scantly to be seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As daisies lurk’d in June-grass, buds in green;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sudden the music ceased, sudden the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of majesty, by dint of passion keen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doubled into a common fist, went grand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knock’d down three cut glasses, and his best ink-stand.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-40" epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then turning round, he saw those trembling two:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Eban,” said he, “as slaves should taste the fruits</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of diligence, I shall remember you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To-morrow, or next day, as time suits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In a finger conversation with my mutes,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Begone!⁠—for you, Chaldean! here remain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fear not, quake not, and as good wine recruits</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A conjurer’s spirits, what cup will you drain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sherry in silver, hock in gold, or glass’d champagne?”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-41" epub:type="z3998:roman">XLI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Commander of the Faithful!” answer’d Hum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“In preference to these, I’ll merely taste</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A thimble-full of old Jamaica rum.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“A simple boon!” said Elfinan, “thou may’st</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Have Nantz, with which my morning-coffee’s laced.”<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="note-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I’ll have a glass of Nantz, then,⁠”—said the Seer,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Made racy⁠—(sure my boldness is misplaced!)⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the third part⁠—(yet that is drinking dear!)⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the least drop of <i xml:lang="fr">crème de citron</i> crystal clear.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-42" epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“I pledge you. Hum! and pledge my dearest love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My Bertha!” “Bertha! Bertha!” cried the sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“I know a many Berthas!” “Mine’s above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All Berthas!” sighed the Emperor. “I engage,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Said Hum, “in duty, and in vassalage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To mention all the Berthas in the earth;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There’s Bertha Watson,⁠—and Miss Bertha Page,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This famed for languid eyes, and that for mirth,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s Bertha Blount of York,⁠—and Bertha Knox of Perth.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-43" epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“You seem to know”⁠—“I do know,” answer’d Hum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Your Majesty’s in love with some fine girl</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Named Bertha; but her surname will not come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without a little conjuring.” “’Tis Pearl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis Bertha Pearl! What makes my brain so whirl?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And she is softer, fairer than her name!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Where does she live?” ask’d Hum. “Her fair locks curl</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So brightly, they put all our fays to shame!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live?⁠—O! at Canterbury, with her old grand dame.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-44" epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Good! good!” cried Hum, “I’ve known her from a child!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She is a changeling of my management;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She was born at midnight in an Indian wild;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her mother’s screams with the striped tiger’s blent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the torch-bearing slaves a halloo sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the jungles; and her palanquin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rested amid the desert’s dreariment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shook with her agony, till fair were seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little Bertha’s eyes ope on the stars serene.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-45" epub:type="z3998:roman">XLV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“I can’t say,” said the monarch, “that may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Just as it happen’d, true or else a bam!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Drink up your brandy, and sit down by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Feel, feel my pulse, how much in love I am;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And if your science is not all a sham,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tell me some means to get the lady here.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Upon my honour!” said the son of Cham,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="note-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“She is my dainty changeling, near and dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although her story sounds at first a little queer.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-46" epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Convey her to me, Hum, or by my crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My sceptre, and my cross-surmounted globe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ll knock you⁠—” “Does your majesty mean⁠—<em>down?</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No, no, you never could my feelings probe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To such a depth!” The Emperor took his robe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wept upon its purple palatine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While Hum continued, shamming half a sob,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“In Canterbury doth your lady shine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let me cool your brandy with a little wine.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-47" epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Whereat a narrow Flemish glass he took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That since belong’d to Admiral De Witt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Admired it with a connoisseuring look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the ripest claret crowned it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, ere the lively head could burst and flit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He turn’d it quickly, nimbly upside down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His mouth being held conveniently fit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To catch the treasure: “Best in all the town!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, smack’d his moist lips, and gave a pleasant frown.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-48" epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Ah! good my Prince, weep not!” And then again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fill’d a bumper. “Great Sire, do not weep!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your pulse is shocking, but I’ll ease your pain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Fetch me that Ottoman, and prithee keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your voice low,” said the Emperor, “and steep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some lady’s-fingers nice in Candy wine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prithee, Hum, behind the screen do peep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For the rose-water vase, magician mine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sponge my forehead⁠—so my love doth make me pine.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-49" epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIX</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Ah, cursed Bellanaine!” “Don’t think of her,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rejoin’d the Mago, “but on Bertha muse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, by my choicest best barometer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You shall not throttled be in marriage noose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ve said it, Sire; you only have to choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bertha or Bellanaine.” So saying, he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the left pocket of his threadbare hose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A sampler hoarded slyly, good as new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holding it by his thumb and finger full in view.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-50" epub:type="z3998:roman">L</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Sire, this is Bertha Pearl’s neat handywork,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her <em>name</em>, see here, <em>Midsummer, ninety-one</em>’⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Elfinan snatch’d it with a sudden jerk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wept as if he never would have done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Honouring with royal tears the poor homespun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereon were broider’d tigers with black eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And long-tailed pheasants, and a rising sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plenty of posies, great stags, butterflies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bigger than stags⁠—a moon⁠—with other mysteries.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-51" epub:type="z3998:roman">LI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The monarch handled o’er and o’er again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These day-school hieroglyphics with a sigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Somewhat in sadness, but pleased in the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till this oracular couplet met his eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Astounded⁠—<em>Cupid, I do thee defy!</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It was too much. He shrunk back in his chair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grew pale as death and fainted⁠—very nigh!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Pho! nonsense!” exclaim’d Hum, “now don’t despair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She does not mean it really. Cheer up, hearty⁠—there!</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-52" epub:type="z3998:roman">LII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“And listen to my words. You say you won’t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On any terms, marry Miss Bellanaine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It goes against your conscience⁠—good! well, don’t.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You say, you love a mortal. I would fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Persuade your honour’s highness to refrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From peccadilloes. But, Sire, as I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What good would that do? And, to be more plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You would do me a mischief some odd day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut off my ears and hands, or head too, by my fay!</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-53" epub:type="z3998:roman">LIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Besides, manners forbid that I should pass any</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vile strictures on the conduct of a prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who should indulge his genius, if he has any,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not, like a subject, foolish matter mince.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now I think on ’t, perhaps I could convince</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your Majesty there is no crime at all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In loving pretty little Bertha, since</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She’s very delicate⁠—not over tall,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fairy’s hand, and in the waist why⁠—very small.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-54" epub:type="z3998:roman">LIV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Ring the repeater, gentle Hum!” “’Tis five,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Said gentle Hum; “the nights draw in apace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The little birds I hear are all alive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I see the dawning touch’d upon your face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall I put out the candles, please your Grace?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Do put them out, and, without more ado,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tell me how I may that sweet girl embrace,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How you can bring her to me.” “That’s for you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Emperor! to adventure, like a lover true.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-55" epub:type="z3998:roman">LV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“I fetch her!”⁠—“Yes, an ’t like your Majesty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as she would be frighten’d wide awake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To travel such a distance through the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Use of some soft manœuvre you must make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For your convenience, and her dear nerves’ sake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nice way would be to bring her in a swoon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anon, I’ll tell you what course were best to take;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You must away this morning.” “Hum! so soon?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sire, you must be in Kent by twelve o’clock at noon.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-56" epub:type="z3998:roman">LVI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">At this great Cæsar started on his feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lifted his wings, and stood attentivewise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those wings to Canterbury you must beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If you hold Bertha as a worthy prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Look in the Almanack⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Moore</i> never lies⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">April the twenty-fourth⁠—this coming day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now breathing its new bloom upon the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will end in <abbr>St.</abbr> Mark’s Eve;⁠—you must away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For on that eve alone can you the maid convey.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-57" epub:type="z3998:roman">LVII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then the magician solemnly ’gan to frown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So that his frost-white eye-brows, beetling low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shaded his deep green eyes, and wrinkles brown</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plaited upon his furnace-scorched brow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forth from his hood that hung his neck below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He lifted a bright casket of pure gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Touch’d a spring-lock, and there in wool or snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Charm’d into ever freezing, lay an old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And legend- leaved book, mysterious to behold.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-58" epub:type="z3998:roman">LVIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Take this same book⁠—it will not bite you, Sire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There, put it underneath your royal arm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though it’s a pretty weight, it will not tire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But rather on your journey keep you warm:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This is the magic, this the potent charm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That shall drive Bertha to a fainting fit!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When the time comes, don’t feel the least alarm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But lift her from the ground, and swiftly flit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to your palace …</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-59" epub:type="z3998:roman">LIX</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“What shall I do with that same book?” “Why merely</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lay it on Bertha’s table, close beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her work-box, and ’twill help your purpose dearly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say no more.” “Or good or ill betide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the wide air to Kent this morn I glide!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Exclaim’d the Emperor, “When I return,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ask what you will,⁠—I’ll give you my new bride!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And take some more wine. Hum;⁠—O, Heavens! I burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be upon the wing! Now, now, that minx I spurn!”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-60" epub:type="z3998:roman">LX</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Leave her to me,” rejoin’d the magian:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“But how shall I account, illustrious fay!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For thine imperial absence? Pho! I can</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say you are very sick, and bar the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To your so loving courtiers for one day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If either of their two Archbishops’ graces</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should talk of extreme unction, I shall say</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You do not like cold pig with Latin phrases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which never should be used but in alarming cases.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-61" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Open the window. Hum; I’m ready now!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Zooks!” exclaim’d Hum, as up the sash he drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Behold, your Majesty, upon the brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of yonder hill, what crowds of people!” “Whew!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The monster’s always after something new,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Return’d his Highness, “they are piping hot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To see my pigsney Bellanaine. Hum! do</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tighten my belt a little,⁠—so, so,⁠—not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too tight,⁠—the book!⁠—my wand!⁠—so, nothing is forgot.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-62" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Wounds! how they shout!” said Hum, “and there,⁠—see, see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Th’ ambassador’s return’d from Pigmio!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The morning’s very fine,⁠—uncommonly!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See, past the skirts of yon white cloud they go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tinging it with soft crimsons! Now below</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sable-pointed heads of firs and pines</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They dip, move on, and with them moves a glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Along the forest side! Now amber lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reach the hill top, and now throughout the valley shines.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-63" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Why, Hum, you’re getting quite poetical!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those <em>nows</em> you managed in a special style.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“If ever you have leisure, Sire, you shall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See scraps of mine will make it worth your while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tit-bits for Phœbus!⁠—yes, you well may smile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hark! hark! the bells!” “A little further yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Good Hum, and let me view this mighty coil.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then the great Emperor full graceful set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His elbow for a prop, and snuff’d his mignonette.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-64" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXIV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">The morn is full of holiday: loud bells</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With rival clamors ring from every spire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cunningly-station’d music dies and swells</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In echoing places; when the winds respire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Light flags stream out like gauzy tongues of fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A metropolitan murmur, lifeful, warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Comes from the northern suburbs; rich attire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Freckles with red and gold the moving swarm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While here and there clear trumpets blow a keen alarm.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-65" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And now the fairy escort was seen clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like the old pageant of Aurora’s train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above a pearl-built minster, hovering near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First wily Crafticant, the chamberlain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Balanced upon his gray-grown pinions twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His slender wand officially reveal’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then black gnomes scattering sixpences like rain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then pages three and three; and next, slave-held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Imaian ’scutcheon bright,⁠—one mouse in argent field.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-66" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXVI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Gentlemen pensioners next; and after them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A troop of winged Janizaries flew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then slaves, as presents bearing many a gem;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then twelve physicians fluttering two and two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next a chaplain in a cassock new;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then Lords in waiting; then (what head not reels</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For pleasure?)⁠—the fair Princess in full view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Borne upon wings,⁠—and very pleased she feels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have such splendour dance attendance at her heels.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-67" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXVII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">For there was more magnificence behind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She waved her handkerchief. “Ah, very grand!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cried Elfinan, and closed the window-blind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“And, Hum, we must not shilly-shally stand,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Adieu! adieu! I’m off for Angle-land!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I say, old Hocus, have you such a thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About you,⁠—feel your pockets, I command,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I want, this instant, an invisible ring,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thank you, old mummy!⁠—now securely I take wing.”</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-68" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXVIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then Elfinan swift vaulted from the floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lighted graceful on the window-sill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Under one arm the magic book he bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The other he could wave about at will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pale was his face, he still look’d very ill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He bow’d at Bellanaine, and said⁠—“Poor Bell!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Farewell! farewell! and if for ever! still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ever fare thee well!”⁠—and then he fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A laughing!⁠—snapp’d his fingers!⁠—shame it is to tell!</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-69" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXIX</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“By ’r Lady! he is gone!” cries Hum, “and I,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(I own it),⁠—have made too free with his wine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Old Crafticant will smoke me. By-the-bye!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This room is full of jewels as a mine,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dear valuable creatures, how ye shine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sometime to-day I must contrive a minute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If Mercury propitiously incline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To examine his scrutoire, and see what’s in it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For of superfluous diamonds I as well may thin it.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-70" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXX</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“The Emperor’s horrid bad; yes, that’s my cue!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some histories say that this was Hum’s last speech;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, being fuddled, he went reeling through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The corridor, and scarce upright could reach</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The stair-head; that being glutted as a leech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And used, as we ourselves have just now said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To manage stairs reversely, like a peach</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Too ripe, he fell, being puzzled in his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With liquor and the staircase: verdict⁠—<em>found stone dead</em>.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-71" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">This, as a falsehood, Crafticanto treats;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as his style is of strange elegance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gentle and tender, full of soft conceits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Much like our Boswell’s,) we will take a glance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At his sweet prose, and, if we can, make dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His woven periods into careless rhyme;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O, little faery Pegasus! rear⁠—prance⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trot round the quarto⁠—ordinary time!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>March, little Pegasus, with pawing hoof sublime!</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-72" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Well, let us see⁠—<em>tenth book and chapter nine</em>,”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus Crafticant pursues his diary:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“’Twas twelve o’clock at night, the weather fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Latitude thirty-six; our scouts descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A flight of starlings making rapidly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards Thibet. <abbr>Mem.</abbr>:⁠—birds fly in the night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From twelve to half-past⁠—wings not fit to fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For a thick fog⁠—the Princess sulky quite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call’d for an extra shawl, and gave her nurse a bite.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-73" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Five minutes before one⁠—brought down a moth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With my new double-barrel⁠—stew’d the thighs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made a very tolerable broth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Princess turn’d dainty, to our great surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Alter’d her mind, and thought it very nice:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeing her pleasant, tried her with a pun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She frown’d; a monstrous owl across us flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About this time,⁠—a sad old figure of fun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bad omen⁠—this new match can’t be a happy one.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-74" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXIV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“From two to half-past, dusky way we made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Above the plains of Gobi,⁠—desert, bleak;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beheld afar off, in the hooded shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of darkness, a great mountain (strange to speak),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spitting, from forth its sulphur-baken peak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fan-shaped burst of blood-red, arrowy fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turban’d with smoke, which still away did reek.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Solid and black from that eternal pyre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the laden winds that scantly could respire.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-75" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Just upon three o’clock, a falling star</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Created an alarm among our troop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kill’d a man-cook, a page, and broke a jar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A tureen, and three dishes, at one swoop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then passing by the Princess, singed her hoop:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could not conceive what Coralline was at,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She clapp’d her hands three times, and cried out ‘Whoop!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some strange Imaian custom. A large bat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came sudden ’fore my face, and brush’d against my hat.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-76" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXVI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Five minutes thirteen seconds after three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far in the west a mighty fire broke out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conjectured, on the instant, it might be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The city of Balk⁠—’twas Balk beyond all doubt:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A griffin, wheeling here and there about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kept reconnoitering us⁠—doubled our guard⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lighted our torches, and kept up a shout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he sheer’d off⁠—the Princess very scared⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many on their marrow-bones for death prepared.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-77" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXVII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“At half-past three arose the cheerful moon⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bivouack’d for four minutes on a cloud⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where from the earth we heard a lively tune</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of tambourines and pipes, severe and loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While on a flowery lawn a brilliant crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cinque-parted danced, some half asleep reposed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the green-faned cedars, some did shroud</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In silken tents, and ’mid light fragrance dozed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or on the open turf their soothed eyelids closed.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-78" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXVIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Dropp’d my gold watch, and kill’d a kettledrum⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It went for apoplexy⁠—foolish folks!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Left it to pay the piper⁠—a good sum⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(I’ve got a conscience, maugre people’s jokes,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To scrape a little favour; ’gan to coax</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her Highness’ pug-dog⁠—got a sharp rebuff⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She wish’d a game at whist⁠—made three revokes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turn’d from myself, her partner, in a huff;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Majesty will know her temper time enough.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-79" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXIX</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“She cried for chess⁠—I play’d a game with her⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Castled her king with such a vixen look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It bodes ill to his Majesty⁠—(refer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the second chapter of my fortieth book,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And see what hoity-toity airs she took).</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At half-past four the morn essay’d to beam⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saluted, as we pass’d, an early rook,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Princess fell asleep, and, in her dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Talk’d of one Master Hubert, deep in her esteem.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-80" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXX</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“About this time⁠—making delightful way⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shed a quill-feather from my larboard wing⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wish’d, trusted, hoped ’twas no sign of decay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thank Heaven, I’m hearty yet!⁠—’twas no such thing:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At five the golden light began to spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With fiery shudder through the bloomed east;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At six we heard Panthea’s churches ring⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The city all his unhived swarms had cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To watch our grand approach, and hail us as we pass’d.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-81" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“As flowers turn their faces to the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So on our flight with hungry eyes they gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, as we shaped our course, this, that way run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With mad-cap pleasure, or hand-clasp’d amaze:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sweet in the air a mild-toned music plays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And progresses through its own labyrinth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Buds gather’d from the green spring’s middle-days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They scatter’d⁠—daisy, primrose, hyacinth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or round white columns wreathed from capital to plinth.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-82" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Onward we floated o’er the panting streets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That seem’d throughout with upheld faces paved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Look where we will, our bird’s-eye vision meets</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Legions of holiday; bright standards waved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fluttering ensigns emulously craved</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our minute’s glance; a busy thunderous roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From square to square, among the buildings raved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As when the sea, at flow, gluts up once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The craggy hollowness of a wild-reefed shore.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-83" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“And ‘Bellanaine for ever!’ shouted they!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While that fair Princess, from her winged chair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bow’d low with high demeanour, and, to pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their new-blown loyalty with guerdon fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still emptied, at meet distance, here and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A plenty horn of jewels. And here I</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Who wish to give the devil her due) declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Against that ugly piece of calumny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which calls them Highland pebble-stones not worth a fly.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-84" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXIV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Still ‘Bellanaine!’ they shouted, while we glide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Slant to a light Ionic portico,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The city’s delicacy, and the pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of our Imperial Basilic; a row</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of lords and ladies, on each hand, make show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Submissive of knee-bent obeisance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All down the steps; and, as we enter’d, lo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The strangest sight⁠—the most unlook’d-for chance⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All things turn’d topsy-turvy in a devil’s dance.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-85" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXV</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“’Stead of his anxious Majesty and court</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At the open doors, with wide saluting eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><i xml:lang="fr">Congées</i> and scrape-graces of every sort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the smooth routine of gallantries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was seen, to our immoderate surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A motley crowd thick gather’d in the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lords, scullions, deputy-scullions, with wild cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stunning the vestible from wall to wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Chief Justice on his knees and hands doth crawl.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-86" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXVI</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Counts of the palace, and the state purveyor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of moth’s-down, to make soft the royal beds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Common Council and my fool Lord Mayor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Marching a-row, each other slipshod treads;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Powder’d bag-wigs and ruffy-tuffy heads</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of cinder wenches meet and soil each other;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Toe crush’d with heel ill-natured fighting breeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Frill-rumpling elbows brew up many a bother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fists in the short ribs keep up the yell and pother.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-87" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXVII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“A Poet, mounted on the Court-Clown’s back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rode to the Princess swift with spurring heels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And close into her face, with rhyming clack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Began a Prothalamion;⁠—she reels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She falls, she faints!⁠—while laughter peals</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Over her woman’s weakness. ‘Where!’ cried I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Where is his Majesty?’ No person feels</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inclined to answer; wherefore instantly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I plunged into the crowd to find him or to die.</span>
			</p>
			<h3 id="the-cap-and-bells-88" epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</h3>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Jostling my way I gain’d the stairs, and ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the first landing, where, incredible!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I met, far gone in liquor, that old man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That vile impostor Hum,⁠⸺’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">So far so well,⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For we have proved the Mago never fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Down stairs on Crafticanto’s evidence;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And therefore duly shall proceed to tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Plain in our own original mood and tense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sequel of this day, though labour’tis immense!</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
