<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Eve of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mark</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-eve-of-st-mark" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				The Eve of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mark
				<span epub:type="subtitle">A Fragment</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Upon a Sabbath-day it fell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twice holy was the Sabbath-bell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That call’d the folk to evening prayer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The city streets were clean and fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From wholesome drench of April rains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, on the western window panes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chilly sunset faintly told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of unmatured green valleys cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the green thorny bloomless hedge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rivers new with spring-tide sedge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of primroses by shelter’d rills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And daisies on the aguish hills.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twice holy was the Sabbath-bell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silent streets were crowded well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With staid and pious companies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm from their fireside orat’ries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moving, with demurest air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To even-song, and vesper prayer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each arched porch, and entry low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was fill’d with patient folk and slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whispers hush, and shuffling feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While play’d the organ loud and sweet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The bells had ceased, the prayers begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Bertha had not yet half done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A curious volume, patch’d and torn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all day long, from earliest morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had taken captive her two eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among its golden broideries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perplex’d her with a thousand things⁠,—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stars of Heaven, and angels’ wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Martyrs in a fiery blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-349"/>
				<span>Azure saints and silver rays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moses’ breastplate and the seven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Candlesticks John saw in Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winged Lion of Saint Mark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Covenantal Ark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its many mysteries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cherubim and golden mice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bertha was a maiden fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelling in th’ old Minster-square;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her fireside she could see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sidelong, its rich antiquity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far as the Bishop’s garden wall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where sycamores and elm-trees tall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full-leaved, the forest had outstript,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By no sharp north-wind ever nipt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shelter’d by the mighty pile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bertha arose, and read awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With forehead ’gainst the window-pane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again she tried, and then again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until the dusk eve left her dark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the legend of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From plaited lawn-frill, fine and thin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She lifted up her soft warm chin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With aching neck and swimming eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dazed with saintly imag’ries.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All was gloom, and silent all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save now and then the still foot-fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one returning homewards late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past the echoing minster-gate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clamorous daws, that all the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above tree-tops and towers play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pair by pair had gone to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each in its ancient belfry-nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where asleep they fall betimes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To music and the drowsy chimes.</span>
			</p>
			<div class="newpage" id="page-350"/>
			<p>
				<span>All was silent, all was gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abroad and in the homely room:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down she sat, poor cheated soul!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And struck a lamp from the dismal coal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lean’d forward, with bright drooping hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slant book, full against the glare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her shadow, in uneasy guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hover’d about, a giant size,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On ceiling-beam and old oak chair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parrot’s cage, and panel-square;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the warm angled winter-screen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which were many monsters seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call’d doves of Siam, Lima mice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And legless birds of Paradise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Macaw, and tender Avadavat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And silken-furr’d Angora cat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untired she read, her shadow still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glower’d about, as it would fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The room with wildest forms and shades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though some ghostly queen of spades</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had come to mock behind her back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dance, and ruffle her garments black.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untired she read the legend page,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of holy Mark, from youth to age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On land, on sea, in pagan chains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoicing for his many pains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes the learned eremite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With golden star, or dagger bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Referr’d to pious poesies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Written in smallest crow-quill size</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the text; and thus the rhyme</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was parcell’d out from time to time:</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">⸺‘Als writith he of swevenis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Men han beforne they wake in bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Whanne that hir friendes thinke him bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">In crimped shroude farre under grounde;</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">And how a litling child mote be</span>
				<br/>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-351"/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">A saint er its nativitie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Gif that the modre (God her blesse!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Kepen in solitarinesse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">And kissen devoute the holy croce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Of Goddes love, and Sathan’s force⁠,—</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">He writith; and thinges many mo</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Of swiche thinges I may not show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Bot I must tellen verilie</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Somdel of Saintè Cicilie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">And chieflie what he auctorethe</span>
				<br/>
				<span xml:lang="enm">Of Saintè Markis life and dethe:’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At length her constant eyelids come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the fervent martyrdom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then lastly to his holy shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exalt amid the tapers’ shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Venice⁠,⸺</span>
			</p>
			<div class="newpage" id="page-352"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
