<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Early Poems</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-poems-of-1818-1819" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Poems of 1818⁠–⁠1819</h2>
			<article id="isabella-or-the-pot-of-basil" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="fulltitle">
					<span epub:type="title">Isabella, or the Pot of Basil</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">A Story From Boccaccio</span>
				</h3>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-192"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Fair Isabel, poor simple Isabel!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lorenzo, a young palmer in love’s eye!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could not in the self-same mansion dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without some stir of heart, some malady;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could not sit at meals but feel how well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It soothed each to be the other by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could not, sure, beneath the same roof sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to each other dream, and nightly weep.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h4>
				<p>
					<span>With every morn their love grew tenderer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With every eve deeper and tenderer still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He might not in house, field, or garden stir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her full shape would all his seeing fill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his continual voice was pleasanter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her, than noise of trees or hidden rill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her lute-string gave an echo of his name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She spoilt her half-done broidery with the same.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">III</h4>
				<p>
					<span>He knew whose gentle hand was at the latch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the door had given her to his eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from her chamber-window he would catch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her beauty farther than the falcon spies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And constant as her vespers would he watch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because her face was turn’d to the same skies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with sick longing all the night outwear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear her morning-step upon the stair.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-193"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>A whole long month of May in this sad plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made their cheeks paler by the break of June:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“To-morrow will I bow to my delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To-morrow will I ask my lady’s boon.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O may I never see another night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lorenzo, if thy lips breathe not love’s tune.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So spake they to their pillows; but, alas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honeyless days and days did he let pass;</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">V</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Until sweet Isabella’s untouch’d cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell sick within the rose’s just domain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell thin as a young mother’s, who doth seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By every lull to cool her infant’s pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How ill she is!” said he, “I may not speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet I will, and tell my love all plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If looks speak love-laws, I will drink her tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the least ’t will startle off her cares.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>So said he one fair morning, and all day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His heart beat awfully against his side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his heart he inwardly did pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For power to speak; but still the ruddy tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stifled his voice, and pulsed resolve away⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fever’d his high conceit of such a bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet brought him to the meekness of a child:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! when passion is both meek and wild!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>So once more he had waked and anguished</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dreary night of love and misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Isabel’s quick eye had not been wed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To every symbol on his forehead high:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-194"/>
					<span>She saw it waxing very pale and dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And straight all flush’d; so, lisped tenderly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lorenzo!”⁠—here she ceased her timid quest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in her tone and look he read the rest.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>“O Isabella, I can half perceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I may speak my grief into thine ear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou didst ever anything believe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Believe how I love thee, believe how near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul is to its doom: I would not grieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy hand by unwelcome pressing, would not fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine eyes by gazing; but I cannot live</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another night, and not my passion shrive.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</h4>
				<p>
					<span>“Love! thou art leading me from wintry cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lady! thou leadest me to summer clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I must taste the blossoms that unfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In its ripe warmth this gracious morning time.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So said, his erewhile timid lips grew bold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And poesied with hers in dewy rhyme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great bliss was with them, and great happiness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew, like a lusty flower in June’s caress.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">X</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Parting they seem’d to tread upon the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twin roses by the zephyr blown apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only to meet again more close, and share</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The inward fragrance of each other’s heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She, to her chamber gone, a ditty fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sang, of delicious love and honey’d dart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with light steps went up a western hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade the sun farewell, and joy’d his fill.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>All close they met again, before the dusk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had taken from the stars its pleasant veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-195"/>
					<span>All close they met, all eves, before the dusk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had taken from the stars its pleasant veil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close in a bower of hyacinth and musk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unknown of any, free from whispering tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! better had it been forever so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than idle ears should pleasure in their woe.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Were they unhappy then?⁠—It cannot be⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too many tears for lovers have been shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too many sighs give we to them in fee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too much of pity after they are dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too many doleful stories do we see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose matter in bright gold were best be read;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except in such a page where Theseus’ spouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the pathless waves towards him bows.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>But, for the general award of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The little sweet doth kill much bitterness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Dido silent is in under-grove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Isabella’s was a great distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though young Lorenzo in warm Indian clove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was not embalm’d, this truth is not the less⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even bees, the little almsmen of spring-bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Know there is richest juice in poison-flowers.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>With her two brothers this fair lady dwelt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enriched from ancestral merchandise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for them many a weary hand did swelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In torched mines and noisy factories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many once proud-quiver’d loins did melt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In blood from stinging whip;⁠—with hollow eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many all day in dazzling river stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take the rich-ored driftings of the flood.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-196"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>For them the Ceylon diver held his breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And went all naked to the hungry shark;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For them his ears gush’d blood; for them in death</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The seal on the cold ice with piteous bark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay full of darts; for them alone did seethe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand men in troubles wide and dark:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-ignorant, they turn’d an easy wheel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That set sharp racks at work, to pinch and peel.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Why were they proud? Because their marble founts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gush’d with more pride than do a wretch’s tears?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why were they proud? Because fair orange-mounts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were of more soft ascent than lazar stairs?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why were they proud? Because red-lined accounts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were richer than the songs of Grecian years?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why were they proud? again we ask aloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why in the name of Glory were they proud?</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Yet were these Florentines as self-retired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hungry pride and gainful cowardice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As two close Hebrews in that land inspired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Paled in and vineyarded from beggar-spies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hawks of ship-mast forests⁠—the untired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pannier’d mules for ducats and old lies⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quick cat’s-paws on the generous stray-away,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great wits in Spanish, Tuscan, and Malay.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>How was it these same ledger-men could spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fair Isabella in her downy nest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How could they find out in Lorenzo’s eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A straying from his toil? Hot Egypt’s pest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into their vision covetous and sly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How could these money-bags see east and west?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-197"/>
					<span>Yet so they did⁠—and every dealer fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must see behind, as doth the hunted hare.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</h4>
				<p>
					<span>O eloquent and famed Boccaccio!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thee we now should ask forgiving boon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of thy spicy myrtles as they blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of thy roses amorous of the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of thy lilies, that do paler grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now they can no more hear thy ghittern’s tune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For venturing syllables that ill beseem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The quiet glooms of such a piteous theme.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Grant thou a pardon here, and then the tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall move on soberly, as it is meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no other crime, no mad assail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make old prose in modern rhyme more sweet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it is done⁠—succeed the verse or fail⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To honour thee, and thy gone spirit greet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stead thee as a verse in English tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An echo of thee in the north-wind sung.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>These brethren having found by many signs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What love Lorenzo for their sister had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how she loved him too, each unconfines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His bitter thoughts to other, well-nigh mad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he, the servant of their trade designs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should in their sister’s love be blithe and glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When ’twas their plan to coax her by degrees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To some high noble and his olive-trees.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>And many a jealous conference had they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many times they bit their lips alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before they fix’d upon a surest way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make the youngster for his crime atone;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-198"/>
					<span>And at the last, these men of cruel clay-</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cut Mercy with a sharp knife to the bone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they resolved in some forest dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To kill Lorenzo, and there bury him.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>So on a pleasant morning, as he leant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the sunrise, o’er the balustrade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the garden-terrace, towards him they bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their footing through the dews; and to him said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“You seem there in the quiet of content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lorenzo, and we are most loth to invade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calm speculation; but if you are wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bestride your steed while cold is in the skies.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>“To-day we purpose, aye, this hour we mount</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To spur three leagues towards the Apennine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come down, we pray thee, ere the hot sun count</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dewy rosary on the eglantine.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lorenzo, courteously as he was wont,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bow’d a fair greeting to these serpents’ whine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went in haste, to get in readiness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With belt, and spur, and bracing huntsman’s dress.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>And as he to the court-yard pass’d along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each third step did he pause, and listen’d oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he could hear his lady’s matin-song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or the light whisper of her footstep soft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he thus over his passion hung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He heard a laugh full musical aloft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, looking up, he saw her features bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smile through an in-door lattice, all delight.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>“Love, Isabel!” said he, “I was in pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest I should miss to bid thee a good morrow:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-199"/>
					<span>Ah! what if I should lose thee, when so fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am to stifle all the heavy sorrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a poor three hours’ absence? but we’ll gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the amorous dark what day doth borrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good bye! I’ll soon be back.”⁠—“Good bye!” said she:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he went she chanted merrily.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>So the two brothers and their murder’d man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rode past fair Florence, to where Arno’s stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gurgles through straighten’d banks, and still doth fan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Itself with dancing bulrush, and the bream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keeps head against the freshets. Sick and wan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The brothers’ faces in the ford did seem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lorenzo’s flush with love.⁠—They pass’d the water</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a forest quiet for the slaughter.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>There was Lorenzo slain and buried in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There in that forest did his great love cease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! when a soul doth thus its freedom win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It aches in loneliness⁠—is ill at peace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the break-covert bloodhounds of such sin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They dipp’d their swords in the water, and did tease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their horses homeward, with convulsed spur,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each richer by his being a murderer.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</h4>
				<p>
					<span>They told their sister how, with sudden speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lorenzo had ta’en ship for foreign lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because of some great urgency and need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their affairs, requiring trusty hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor Girl! put on thy stifling widow’s weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ’scape at once from Hope’s accursed bands:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-day thou wilt not see him, nor to-morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the next day will be a day of sorrow.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-200"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</h4>
				<p>
					<span>She weeps alone for pleasures not to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sorely she wept until the night came on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, instead of love, O misery!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She brooded o’er the luxury alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His image in the dusk she seem’d to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the silence made a gentle moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spreading her perfect arms upon the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on her couch low murmuring, “Where? O where?”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>But Selfishness, Love’s cousin, held not long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its fiery vigil in her single breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fretted for the golden hour, and hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the time with feverish unrest⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not long⁠—for soon into her heart a throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of higher occupants, a richer zest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came tragic; passion not to be subdued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sorrow for her love in travels rude.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>In the mid days of autumn, on their eves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The breath of Winter comes from far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sick west continually bereaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of some gold tinge, and plays a roundelay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of death among the bushes and the leaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make all bare before he dares to stray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his north cavern. So sweet Isabel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By gradual decay from beauty fell,</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Because Lorenzo came not. Oftentimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She ask’d her brothers, with an eye all pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Striving to be itself, what dungeon climes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could keep him off so long? They spake a tale</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-201"/>
					<span>Time after time, to quiet her. Their crimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came on them, like a smoke from Hinnom’s vale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every night in dreams they groan’d aloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see their sister in her snowy shroud.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>And she had died in drowsy ignorance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for a thing more deadly dark than all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It came like a fierce potion, drunk by chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which saves a sick man from the feather’d pall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For some few gasping moments; like a lance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waking an Indian from his cloudy hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cruel pierce, and bringing him again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sense of the gnawing fire at heart and brain.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>It was a vision.⁠—In the drowsy gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dull of midnight, at her couch’s foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lorenzo stood, and wept: the forest tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had marr’d his glossy hair which once could shoot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lustre into the sun, and put cold doom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his lips, and taken the soft lute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his lorn voice, and past his loamed ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had made a miry channel for his tears.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Strange sound it was, when the pale shadow spake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For there was striving, in its piteous tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speak as when on earth it was awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Isabella on its music hung:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Languor there was in it, and tremulous shake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in a palsied Druid’s harp unstrung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through it moan’d a ghostly undersong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like hoarse night-gusts sepulchral briars among.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Its eyes, though wild, were still all dewy bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With love, and kept all phantom fear aloof</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-202"/>
					<span>From the poor girl by magic of their light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The while it did unthread the horrid woof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the late darken’d time,⁠—the murderous spite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pride and avarice,⁠—the dark pine roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the forest⁠—and the sodden turfed dell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, without any word, from stabs he fell.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Saying moreover, “Isabel, my sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Red whortleberries droop above my head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a large flint-stone weighs upon my feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Around me beeches and high chestnuts shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their leaves and prickly nuts; a sheepfold bleat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comes from beyond the river to my bed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, shed one tear upon my heather-bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it shall comfort me within the tomb.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIX</h4>
				<p>
					<span>“I am a shadow now, alas! alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the skirts of human nature dwelling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone: I chant alone the holy mass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While little sounds of life are round me knelling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glossy bees at noon do fieldward pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many a chapel bell the hour is telling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paining me through: those sounds grow strange to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou art distant in Humanity.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</h4>
				<p>
					<span>“I know what was, I feel full well what is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I should rage, if spirits could go mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I forget the taste of earthly bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That paleness warms my grave, as though I had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Seraph chosen from the bright abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be my spouse: thy paleness makes me glad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy beauty grows upon me, and I feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A greater love through all my essence steal.”</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-203"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XLI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>The Spirit mourn’d “Adieu!”⁠—dissolved, and left</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The atom darkness in a slow turmoil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when of healthful midnight sleep bereft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinking on rugged hours and fruitless toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We put our eyes into a pillowy cleft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And see the spangly gloom froth up and boil:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It made sad Isabella’s eyelids ache,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the dawn she started up awake.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>“Ha! ha!” said she, “I knew not this hard life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I thought the worst was simple misery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought some Fate with pleasure or with strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Portion’d us⁠—happy days, or else to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there is crime⁠—a brother’s bloody knife!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet Spirit, thou hast school’d my infancy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll visit thee for this, and kiss thine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greet thee morn and even in the skies.”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>When the full morning came, she had devised</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How she might secret to the forest hie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How she might find the clay, so dearly prized,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sing to it one latest lullaby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How her short absence might be unsurmised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While she the inmost of the dream would try.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resolved, she took with her an aged nurse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went into that dismal forest-hearse.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>See, as they creep along the river side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How she doth whisper to that aged Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after looking round the champaign wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shows her a knife.⁠—“What feverous hectic flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burns in thee, child?⁠—what good can thee betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou shouldst smile again?”⁠—The evening came,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-204"/>
					<span>And they had found Lorenzo’s earthy bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flint was there, the berries at his head.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XLV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Who hath not loiter’d in a green churchyard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let his spirit, like a demon-mole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Work through the clayey soil and gravel hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see skull, coffin’d bones, and funeral stole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pitying each form that hungry Death hath marr’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And filling it once more with human soul?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! this is holiday to what was felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Isabella by Lorenzo knelt.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>She gazed into the fresh-thrown mould, as though</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One glance did fully all its secrets tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clearly she saw, as other eyes would know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pale limbs at bottom of a crystal well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the murderous spot she seem’d to grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a native lily of the dell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with her knife, all sudden, she began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dig more fervently than misers can.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Soon she turn’d up a soiled glove, whereon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her silk had play’d in purple phantasies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She kiss’d it with a lip more chill than stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And put it in her bosom, where it dries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And freezes utterly unto the bone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those dainties made to still an infant’s cries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then ’gan she work again; nor stay’d her care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to throw back at times her veiling hair.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>That old nurse stood beside her wondering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until her heart felt pity to the core</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At sight of such a dismal labouring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so she kneeled, with her locks all hoar,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-205"/>
					<span>And put her lean hands to the horrid thing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three hours they labour’d at this travail sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last they felt the kernel of the grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Isabella did not stamp and rave.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIX</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! wherefore all this wormy circumstance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why linger at the yawning tomb so long?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O for the gentleness of old Romance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The simple plaining of a minstrel’s song!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair reader, at the old tale take a glance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For here, in truth, it doth not well belong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speak:⁠—O turn thee to the very tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And taste the music of that vision pale.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">L</h4>
				<p>
					<span>With duller steel than the Perséan sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They cut away no formless monster’s head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one, whose gentleness did well accord</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With death, as life. The ancient harps have said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love never dies, but lives, immortal Lord:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If Love impersonate was ever dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pale Isabella kiss’d it, and low moan’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T was love; cold,⁠—dead indeed, but not dethron’d.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">LI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>In anxious secrecy they took it home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then the prize was all for Isabel:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She calm’d its wild hair with a golden comb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all around each eye’s sepulchral cell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pointed each fringed lash; the smeared loam</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With tears, as chilly as a dripping well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She drench’d away: and still she comb’d, and kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighing all day⁠—and still she kiss’d and wept.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">LII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Then in a silken scarf,⁠—sweet with the dews</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of precious flowers pluck’d in Araby,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-206"/>
					<span>And divine liquids come with odorous ooze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the cold serpent-pipe refreshfully,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wrapp’d it up; and for its tomb did choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A garden-pot, wherein she laid it by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cover’d it with mould, and o’er it set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet Basil, which her tears kept ever wet.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">LIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>And she forgot the stars, the moon, and sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she forgot the blue above the trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she forgot the dells where waters run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she forgot the chilly autumn breeze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had no knowledge when the day was done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the new morn she saw not: but in peace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung over her sweet Basil evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And moisten’d it with tears unto the core.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">LIV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>And so she ever fed it with thin tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence thick, and green, and beautiful it grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that it smelt more balmy than its peers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Basil-tufts in Florence; for it drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nurture besides, and life, from human fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the fast mouldering head there shut from view:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the jewel, safely casketed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came forth, and in perfumed leafits spread.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">LV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>O Melancholy, linger here awhile!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Music, Music, breathe despondingly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Echo, Echo, from some sombre isle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unknown, Lethean, sigh to us⁠—O sigh!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirits in grief, lift up your heads, and smile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lift up your heads, sweet Spirits, heavily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make a pale light in your cypress glooms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tinting with silver wan your marble tombs.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-207"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">LVI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Moan hither, all ye syllables of woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the deep throat of sad Melpomene!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through bronzed lyre in tragic order go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And touch the strings into a mystery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sound mournfully upon the winds and low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For simple Isabel is soon to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the dead: She withers, like a palm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cut by an Indian for its juicy balm.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">LVII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>O leave the palm to wither by itself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let not quick Winter chill its dying hour!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may not be⁠—those Baälites of pelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her brethren, noted the continual shower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her dead eyes: and many a curious elf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among her kindred, wonder’d that such dower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of youth and beauty should be thrown aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By one mark’d out to be a Noble’s bride.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">LVIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>And, furthermore, her brethren wonder’d much</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why she sat drooping by the Basil green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And why it flourish’d, as by magic touch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greatly they wonder’d what the thing might mean:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could not surely give belief, that such</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A very nothing would have power to wean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her from her own fair youth, and pleasures gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even remembrance of her love’s delay.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">LIX</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore they watch’d a time when they might sift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This hidden whim; and long they watch’d in vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For seldom did she go to chapel-shrift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seldom felt she any hunger-pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-208"/>
					<span>And when she left, she hurried back, as swift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As bird on wing to breast its eggs again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, patient as a hen-bird, sat her there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside her Basil, weeping through her hair.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">LX</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Yet they contrived to steal the Basil-pot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to examine it in secret place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thing was vile with green and livid spot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet they knew it was Lorenzo’s face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The guerdon of their murder they had got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so left Florence in a moment’s space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never to turn again.⁠—Away they went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With blood upon their heads, to banishment.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">LXI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>O Melancholy, turn thine eyes away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Music, Music, breathe despondingly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Echo, Echo, on some other day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From isles Lethean, sigh to us⁠—O sigh!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirits of grief, sing not your “Well-a-way!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Isabel, sweet Isabel, will die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will die a death too lone and incomplete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now they have ta’en away her Basil sweet.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">LXII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Piteous she look’d on dead and senseless things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Asking for her lost Basil amorously:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with melodious chuckle in the strings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her lorn voice, she oftentimes would cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the Pilgrim in his wanderings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ask him where her Basil was; and why</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T was hid from her: “For cruel ’t is,” said she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“To steal my Basil-pot away from me.”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">LXIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>And so she pined, and so she died forlorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Imploring for her Basil to the last.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-209"/>
					<span>No heart was there in Florence but did mourn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In pity of her love, so overcast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a sad ditty of this story born</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From mouth to mouth through all the country pass’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still is the burthen sung⁠—“O cruelty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To steal my Basil-pot away from me!”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-homer" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To Homer</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Standing aloof in giant ignorance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thee I hear and of the Cyclades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one who sits ashore and longs perchance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To visit dolphin-coral in deep seas.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thou wast blind!⁠—but then the veil was rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Jove uncurtain’d Heaven to let thee live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Neptune made for thee a spumy tent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Pan made sing for thee his forest-hive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ay on the shores of darkness there is light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And precipices show untrodden green;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a budding morrow in midnight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is a triple sight in blindness keen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such seeing hadst thou, as it once befell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Dian, Queen of Earth, and Heaven, and Hell.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="fragment-of-an-ode-to-maia" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Fragment of an Ode to Maia</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Mother of Hermes! and still youthful Maia!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">May I sing to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou wast hymned on the shores of Baiae?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or may I woo thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In earlier Sicilian? or thy smiles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seek as they once were sought, in Grecian isles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By bards who died content on pleasant sward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaving great verse unto a little clan?</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-210"/>
					<span>O, give me their old vigour, and unheard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save of the quiet Primrose, and the span</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of heaven and few ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rounded by thee, my song should die away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Content as theirs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich in the simple worship of a day.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="song-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Song</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Hush, hush! tread softly! hush, hush, my dear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All the house is asleep, but we know very well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the jealous, the jealous old bald-pate may hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho’ you’ve padded his night-cap⁠—O sweet Isabel!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Tho’ your feet are more light than a Faery’s feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Who dances on bubbles where brooklets meet⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hush, hush! soft tiptoe! hush, hush, my dear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For less than a nothing the jealous can hear.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h4>
				<p>
					<span>No leaf doth tremble, no ripple is there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the river,⁠—all’s still, and the night’s sleepy eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Closes up, and forgets all its Lethean care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Charm’d to death by the drone of the humming May-fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And the Moon, whether prudish or complaisant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Has fled to her bower, well knowing I want</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No light in the dusk, no torch in the gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my Isabel’s eyes, and her lips pulp’d with bloom.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-211"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">III</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Lift the latch! ah gently! ah tenderly⁠—sweet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We are dead if that latchet gives one little clink!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well done⁠—now those lips, and a flowery seat⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The old man may sleep, and the planets may wink;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The shut rose shall dream of our loves and awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Full-blown, and such warmth for the morning take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stock-dove shall hatch her soft brace and shall coo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I kiss to the melody, aching all through.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="verses-written-during-a-tour-in-scotland" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Verses Written During a Tour in Scotland</h3>
				<h4>
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">On Visiting the Tomb of Burns</span>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>The Town, the churchyard, and the setting sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Clouds, the trees, the rounded hills all seem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though beautiful, cold⁠—strange⁠—as in a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I dreamed long ago, now new begun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The short lived, paly Summer is but won</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Winter’s ague, for one hour’s gleam;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though sapphire-warm, their Stars do never beam:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All is cold Beauty; pain is never done:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For who has mind to relish, Minos-wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Real of Beauty, free from that dead hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sickly imagination and sick pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cast wan upon it! Burns! with honour due</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I oft have honour’d thee. Great shadow, hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy face; I sin against thy native skies.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-212"/>
				<h4>
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">To Ailsa Rock</span>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Hearken, thou craggy ocean pyramid!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give answer from thy voice, the sea-fowls’ screams!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When were thy shoulders mantled in huge streams?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, from the sun, was thy broad forehead hid?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How long is ’t since the mighty power bid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thee heave to airy sleep from fathom dreams?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sleep in the lap of thunder or sunbeams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or when gray clouds are thy cold coverlid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou answer’st not; for thou art dead asleep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy life is but two dead eternities⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last in air, the former in the deep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First with the whales, last with the eagle-skies⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drown’d wast thou till an earthquake made thee steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another cannot wake thy giant size.</span>
				</p>
				<h4>
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Written in the Cottage Where Burns Was Born</span>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>This mortal body of a thousand days</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now fills, O Burns, a space in thine own room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where thou didst dream alone on budded bays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Happy and thoughtless of thy day of doom!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My pulse is warm with thine old Barley-bree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My head is light with pledging a great soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My eyes are wandering, and I cannot see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fancy is dead and drunken at its goal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet can I stamp my foot upon thy floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet can I ope thy window-sash to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The meadow thou hast tramped o’er and o’er,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet can I think of thee till thought is blind,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet can I gulp a bumper to thy name,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O smile among the shades, for this is fame!</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-213"/>
				<h4>
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">At Fingal’s Cave</span>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Not Aladdin magian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever such a work began;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not the wizard of the Dee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever such a dream could see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not St. John, in Patmos’ isle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the passion of his toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he saw the churches seven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Golden aisled, built up in heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazed at such a rugged wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I stood its roofing under.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! I saw one sleeping there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the marble cold and bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the surges wash’d his feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his garments white did beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drench’d about the sombre rocks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On his neck his well-grown locks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifted dry above the main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were upon the curl again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What is this? and what art thou?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whisper’d I, and touch’d his brow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What art thou? and what is this?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whisper’d I, and strove to kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spirit’s hand, to wake his eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up he started in a trice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I am Lycidas,” said he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Famed in funeral minstrelsy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This was architectured thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the great Oceanus!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here his mighty waters play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hollow organs all the day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, by turns, his dolphins all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Finny palmers, great and small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come to pay devotion due,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each a mouth of pearls must strew!</span>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-214"/>
					<span>Many a mortal of these days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dares to pass our sacred ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dares to touch, audaciously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This cathedral of the sea!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have been the pontiff-priest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the waters never rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where a fledgy sea-bird choir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soars for ever! Holy fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have hid from mortal man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proteus is my Sacristan!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the dulled eye of mortal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath pass’d beyond the rocky portal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So for ever will I leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such a taint, and soon unweave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the magic of the place.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So saying, with a Spirit’s glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He dived!</span>
				</p>
				<h4>
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Written Upon the Top of Ben Nevis</span>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Read me a lesson, Muse, and speak it loud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the top of Nevis, blind in mist!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I look into the chasms, and a shroud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vaporous doth hide them,⁠—just so much wist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mankind do know of hell; I look o’erhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there is sullen mist⁠—even so much</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mankind can tell of heaven; mist is spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the earth, beneath me,⁠—even such,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so vague is man’s sight of himself!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here are the craggy stones beneath my feet,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus much I know that, a poor witless elf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I tread on them,⁠—that all my eye doth meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is mist and crag, not only on this height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the world of thought and mental might!</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-215"/>
			</article>
			<article id="translation-from-a-sonnet-of-ronsard" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Translation From a Sonnet of Ronsard</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Nature withheld Cassandra in the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For more adornment, a full thousand years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took their cream of Beauty’s fairest dyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shaped and tinted her above all Peers:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile Love kept her dearly with his wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And underneath their shadow fill’d her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a richness that the cloudy Kings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of high Olympus utter’d slavish sighs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When from the Heavens I saw her first descend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My heart took fire, and only burning pains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were my pleasures⁠—they my Life’s sad end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love pour’d her beauty into my warm veins.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-a-lady-seen-for-a-few-moments-at-vauxhall" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To a Lady Seen for a Few Moments at Vauxhall</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Time’s sea hath been five years at its slow ebb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long hours have to and fro let creep the sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since I was tangled in thy beauty’s web,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And snared by the ungloving of thine hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet I never look on midnight sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I behold thine eyes’ well-memoried light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot look upon the rose’s dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to thy cheek my soul doth take its flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot look on any budding flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But my fond ear, in fancy at thy lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hearkening for a love-sound, doth devour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its sweets in the wrong sense:⁠—Thou dost eclipse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every delight with sweet remembering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grief unto my darling joys dost bring.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<div class="newpage" id="page-216"/>
			<article id="fancy" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Fancy</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ever let the Fancy roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasure never is at home:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At a touch sweet Pleasure melteth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to bubbles when rain pelteth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then let winged Fancy wander</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the thought still spread beyond her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open wide the mind’s cage-door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She’ll dart forth, and cloudward soar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O sweet Fancy! let her loose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Summer’s joys are spoilt by use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the enjoying of the Spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fades as does its blossoming;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Autumn’s red-lipp’d fruitage too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blushing through the mist and dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cloys with tasting: What do then?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sit thee by the ingle, when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sear faggot blazes bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirit of a winter’s night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the soundless earth is muffled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the caked snow is shuffled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the ploughboy’s heavy shoon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the Night doth meet the Noon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a dark conspiracy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To banish Even from her sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sit thee there, and send abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a mind self-overawed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fancy, high-commission’d:⁠—send her!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She has vassals to attend her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She will bring, in spite of frost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauties that the earth hath lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She will bring thee, all together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All delights of summer weather;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the buds and bells of May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From dewy sward or thorny spray;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-217"/>
					<span>All the heaped Autumn’s wealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a still, mysterious stealth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She will mix these pleasures up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like three fit wines in a cup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt quaff it:⁠—thou shalt hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distant harvest-carols clear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rustle of the reaped corn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet birds antheming the morn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in the same moment⁠—hark!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is the early April lark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the rooks, with busy caw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foraging for sticks and straw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt, at one glance, behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The daisy and the marigold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White-plumed lilies, and the first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hedge-grown primrose that hath burst;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shaded hyacinth, alway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sapphire queen of the mid-May;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every leaf, and every flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pearled with the self-same shower.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt see the field-mouse peep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meagre from its celled sleep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the snake all winter-thin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast on sunny bank its skin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freckled nest-eggs thou shalt see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hatching in the hawthorn-tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the hen-bird’s wing doth rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quiet on her mossy nest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the hurry and alarm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the bee-hive casts its swarm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Acorns ripe down-pattering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the autumn breezes sing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Oh, sweet Fancy! let her loose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Everything is spoilt by use;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where’s the cheek that doth not fade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too much gazed at? Where’s the maid</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-218"/>
					<span>Whose lip mature is ever new?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wheres the eye, however blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does not weary? Where’s the face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One would meet in every place?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where’s the voice, however soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One would hear so very oft?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At a touch sweet Pleasure melteth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to bubbles when rain pelteth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let, then, winged Fancy find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee a mistress to thy mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dulcet-eyed as Ceres’ daughter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere the God of Torment taught her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How to frown and how to chide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a waist and with a side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White as Hebe’s, when her zone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slipt its golden clasp, and down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell her kirtle to her feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While she held the goblet sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Jove grew languid.⁠—Break the mesh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Fancy’s silken leash;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quickly break her prison-string.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such joys as these she’ll bring.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the winged Fancy roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasure never is at home.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="ode" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ode</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Bards of Passion and of Mirth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have left your souls on earth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have ye souls in heaven too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Double-lived in regions new?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, and those of heaven commune</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the spheres of sun and moon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the noise of fountains wond’rous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the parle of voices thund’rous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the whisper of heaven’s trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one another, in soft ease</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-219"/>
					<span>Seated on Elysian lawns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Browsed by none but Dian’s fawns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Underneath large blue-bells tented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the daisies are rose-scented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the rose herself has got</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perfume which on earth is not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the nightingale doth sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not a senseless, tranced thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But divine melodious truth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Philosophic numbers smooth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tales and golden histories</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven and its mysteries.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thus ye live on high, and then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the earth ye live again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the souls ye left behind you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Teach us, here, the way to find you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where your other souls are joying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never slumber’d, never cloying.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, your earth-born souls still speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mortals, of their little week;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their sorrows and delights;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their passions and their spites;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their glory and their shame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What doth strengthen and what maim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus ye teach us, every day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wisdom, though fled far away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Bards of Passion and of Mirth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have left your souls on earth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have souls in heaven too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Double-lived in regions new!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="song-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Song</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I had a dove and the sweet dove died;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I have thought it died of grieving:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-220"/>
					<span>O, what could it grieve for? Its feet were tied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a silken thread of my own hand’s weaving;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet little red feet! why should you die⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should you leave me, sweet bird! why?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You lived alone in the forest-tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, pretty thing! would you not live with me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I kiss’d you oft and gave you white peas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why not live sweetly, as in the green trees?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="ode-on-melancholy" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ode on Melancholy</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h4>
				<p>
					<span>No, no! go not to Lethe, neither twist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wolf’s-bane, tight-rooted, for its poisonous wine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor suffer thy pale forehead to be kiss’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By nightshade, ruby grape of Proserpine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make not your rosary of yew-berries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor let the beetle, or the death-moth be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Your mournful Psyche, nor the downy owl</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A partner in your sorrow’s mysteries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For shade to shade will come too drowsily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And drown the wakeful anguish of the soul.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h4>
				<p>
					<span>But when the melancholy fit shall fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sudden from heaven like a weeping cloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fosters the droop-headed flowers all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hides the green hills in an April shroud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then glut thy sorrow on a morning rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or on the rainbow of the salt-sand wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or on the wealth of globed peonies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if thy mistress some rich anger shows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emprison her soft hand, and let her rave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And feed deep, deep upon her peerless eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-221"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">III</h4>
				<p>
					<span>She dwells with Beauty⁠—Beauty that must die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Joy, whose hand is ever at his lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bidding adieu; and aching Pleasure nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turning to poison while the bee-mouth sips:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, in the very temple of Delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Veil’d Melancholy has her sovran shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Though seen of none save him whose strenuous tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can burst Joy’s grape against his palate fine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His soul shall taste the sadness of her might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And be among her cloudy trophies hung.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-eve-of-st-agnes" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Eve of <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">St. Agnes’ Eve⁠—Ah, bitter chill it was!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The owl, for all his feathers, was a-cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hare limp’d trembling through the frozen grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And silent was the flock in woolly fold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Numb were the Beadsman’s fingers, while he told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His rosary, and while his frosted breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like pious incense from a censer old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seem’d taking flight for heaven, without a death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past the sweet Virgin’s picture, while his prayer he saith.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">His prayer he saith, this patient, holy man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then takes his lamp, and riseth from his knees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And back returneth, meagre, barefoot, wan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the chapel aisle by slow degrees:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sculptured dead, on each side, seem to freeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emprison’d in black, purgatorial rails:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knights, ladies, praying in dumb orat’ries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He passeth by; and his weak spirit fails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think how they may ache in icy hoods and mails.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-222"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">III</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Northward he turneth through a little door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scarce three steps, ere Music’s golden tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flatter’d to tears this aged man and poor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But no⁠—already had his death-bell rung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The joys of all his life were said and sung:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His was harsh penance on St. Agnes’ Eve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another way he went, and soon among</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rough ashes sat he for his soul’s reprieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all night kept awake, for sinners’ sake to grieve.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">That ancient Beadsman heard the prelude soft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so it chanced, for many a door was wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From hurry to and fro. Soon, up aloft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The silver, snarling trumpets ’gan to chide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The level chambers, ready with their pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were glowing to receive a thousand guests:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The carved angels, ever eager-eyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stared, where upon their heads the cornice rests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hair blown back, and wings put crosswise on their breasts.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">V</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">At length burst in the argent revelry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With plume, tiara, and all rich array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Numerous as shadows haunting fairily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The brain, new-stuff’d, in youth, with triumphs gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of old romance. These let us wish away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turn, sole-thoughted, to one Lady there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose heart had brooded, all that wintry day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On love, and wing’d St. Agnes’ saintly care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As she had heard old dames full many times declare.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-223"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">They told her how, upon St. Agnes’ Eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Young virgins might have visions of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And soft adorings from their loves receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the honey’d middle of the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If ceremonies due they did aright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As, supperless to bed they must retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And couch supine their beauties, lily white;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor look behind, nor sideways, but require</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Heaven with upward eyes for all that they desire.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Full of this whim was thoughtful Madeline:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The music, yearning like a God in pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She scarcely heard: her maiden eyes divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fix’d on the floor, saw many a sweeping train</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pass by⁠—she heeded not at all: in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came many a tiptoe, amorous cavalier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And back retired; not cool’d by high disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she saw not: her heart was otherwhere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sigh’d for Agnes’ dreams, the sweetest of the year.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She danced along with vague, regardless eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Anxious her lips, her breathing quick and short:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hallow’d hour was near at hand: she sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amid the timbrels, and the throng’d resort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whisperers in anger, or in sport;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Mid looks of love, defiance, hate, and scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hoodwink’d with faery fancy; all amort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save to St. Agnes and her lambs unshorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the bliss to be before to-morrow morn.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So, purposing each moment to retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She linger’d still. Meantime, across the moors,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-224"/>
					<span class="i1">Had come young Porphyro, with heart on fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Madeline. Beside the portal doors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Buttress’d from moonlight, stands he, and implores</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All saints to give him sight of Madeline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for one moment in the tedious hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he might gaze and worship all unseen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance speak, kneel, touch, kiss⁠—in sooth such things have been.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">X</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He ventures in: let no buzz’d whisper tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All eyes be muffled, or a hundred swords</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will storm his heart. Love’s fev’rous citadel:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him, those chambers held barbarian hordes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hyena foemen, and hot-blooded lords,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose very dogs would execrations howl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against his lineage: not one breast affords</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him any mercy, in that mansion foul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save one old beldame, weak in body and in soul.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Ah, happy chance! the aged creature came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shuffling along with ivory-headed wand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To where he stood, hid from the torch’s flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind a broad hall-pillar, far beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sound of merriment and chorus bland:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He startled her; but soon she knew his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grasp’d his fingers in her palsied hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, “Mercy, Porphyro! hie thee from this place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are all here to-night, the whole bloodthirsty race!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Get hence! get hence! there’s dwarfish Hildebrand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had a fever late, and in the fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cursed thee and thine, both house and land:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-225"/>
					<span class="i1">Then there’s that old Lord Maurice, not a whit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More tame for his gray hairs⁠—Alas me! flit!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flit like a ghost away.”⁠—“Ah, Gossip dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We’re safe enough; here in this armchair sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell me how”⁠—“Good Saints! not here, not here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow me, child, or else these stones will be thy bier.”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He follow’d through a lowly arched way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brushing the cobwebs with his lofty plume;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as she mutter’d “Well-a⁠—well-a-day!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He found him in a little moonlight room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pale, latticed, chill, and silent as a tomb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Now tell me where is Madeline,” said he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O tell me, Angela, by the holy loom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which none but secret sisterhood may see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they St. Agnes’ wool are weaving piously.”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“St. Agnes! Ah! it is St. Agnes’ Eve⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet men will murder upon holy days:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou must hold water in a witch’s sieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And be liege-lord of all the Elves and Fays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To venture so: it fills me with amaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see thee, Porphyro!⁠—St. Agnes’ Eve!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God’s help! my lady fair the conjurer plays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This very night: good angels her deceive!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let me laugh awhile, I’ve mickle time to grieve.”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Feebly she laugheth in the languid moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While Porphyro upon her face doth look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like puzzled urchin on an aged crone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who keepeth closed a wond’rous riddle-book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As spectacled she sits in chimney nook.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-226"/>
					<span class="i1">But soon his eyes grew brilliant, when she told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His lady’s purpose; and he scarce could brook</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tears, at the thought of those enchantments cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Madeline asleep in lap of legends old.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Sudden a thought came like a full-blown rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flushing his brow, and in his pained heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made purple riot: then doth he propose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A stratagem, that makes the beldame start:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“A cruel man and impious thou art:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet lady, let her pray, and sleep, and dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone with her good angels, far apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From wicked men like thee. Go, go! I deem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou canst not surely be the same that thou didst seem.”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“I will not harm her, by all saints I swear,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quoth Porphyro: “O may I ne’er find grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When my weak voice shall whisper its last prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If one of her soft ringlets I displace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or look with ruffian passion in her face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good Angela, believe me by these tears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or I will, even in a moment’s space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awake, with horrid shout, my foemen’s ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beard them, though they be more fang’d than wolves and bears.”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ah! why wilt thou affright a feeble soul?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A poor, weak, palsy-stricken, church-yard thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose passing-bell may ere the midnight toll;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose prayers for thee, each morn and evening,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were never miss’d.” Thus plaining, doth she bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentler speech from burning Porphyro;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-227"/>
					<span class="i1">So woful, and of such deep sorrowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Angela gives promise she will do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever he shall wish, betide her weal or woe.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Which was, to lead him, in close secrecy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even to Madeline’s chamber, and there hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him in a closet, of such privacy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he might see her beauty unespied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And win perhaps that night a peerless bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While legion’d fairies paced the coverlet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pale enchantment held her sleepy-eyed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never on such a night have lovers met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Merlin paid his Demon all the monstrous debt.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“It shall be as thou wishest,” said the Dame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“All cates and dainties shall be stored there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quickly on this feast-night: by the tambour frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her own lute thou wilt see: no time to spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I am slow and feeble, and scarce dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On such a catering trust my dizzy head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wait here, my child, with patience; kneel in prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The while: Ah! thou must needs the lady wed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or may I never leave my grave among the dead.”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">So saying she hobbled off with busy fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lover’s endless minutes slowly pass’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Dame return’d, and whisper’d in his ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To follow her; with aged eyes aghast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From fright of dim espial. Safe at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through many a dusky gallery, they gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The maiden’s chamber, silken, hush’d and chaste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Porphyro took covert, pleased amain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His poor guide hurried back with agues in her brain.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-228"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Her falt’ring hand upon the balustrade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Angela was feeling for the stair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Madeline, St. Agnes’ charmed maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rose, like a mission’d spirit, unaware:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With silver taper’s light, and pious care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turn’d, and down the aged gossip led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To a safe level matting. Now prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Young Porphyro, for gazing on that bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She comes, she comes again, like ring-dove fray’d and fled.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Out went the taper as she hurried in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its little smoke, in pallid moonshine, died:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She closed the door, she panted, all akin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To spirits of the air, and visions wide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No uttered syllable, or, woe betide!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But to her heart, her heart was voluble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Paining with eloquence her balmy side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As though a tongueless nightingale should swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her throat in vain, and die, heart-stifled in her dell.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">A casement high and triple arch’d there was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All garlanded with carven imag’ries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fruits, and flowers, and bunches of knot-grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And diamonded with panes of quaint device,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Innumerable of stains and splendid dyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As are the tiger-moth’s deep-damask’d wings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the midst, ’mong thousand heraldries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And twilight saints, and dim emblazonings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shielded scutcheon blush’d with blood of queens and kings.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Full on this casement shone the wintry moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And threw warm gules on Madeline’s fair breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-229"/>
					<span class="i1">As down she knelt for heaven’s grace and boon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rose-bloom fell on her hands, together prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on her silver cross soft amethyst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on her hair a glory, like a saint:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She seem’d a splendid angel, newly drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save wings, for heaven:⁠—Porphyro grew faint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She knelt, so pure a thing, so free from mortal taint.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Anon his heart revives: her vespers done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all its wreathed pearls her hair she frees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unclasps her warmed jewels one by one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loosens her fragrant bodice; by degrees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her rich attire creeps rustling to her knees:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Half-hidden, like a mermaid in sea-weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pensive awhile she dreams awake, and sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fancy, fair St. Agnes in her bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But dares not look behind, or all the charm is fled.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Soon, trembling in her soft and chilly nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sort of wakeful swoon, perplex’d she lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the poppied warmth of sleep oppress’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her soothed limbs, and soul fatigued away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flown, like a thought, until the morrow-day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blissfully haven’d both from joy and pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clasp’d like a missal where swart Paynims pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blinded alike from sunshine and from rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though a rose should shut, and be a bud again.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Stol’n to this paradise, and so entranced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Porphyro gazed upon her empty dress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And listen’d to her breathing, if it chanced</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wake into a slumberous tenderness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which when he heard, that minute did he bless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breathed himself: then from the closet crept,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-230"/>
					<span class="i1">Noiseless as fear in a wide wilderness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And over the hush’d carpet, silent, stept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’tween the curtains peep’d, where, lo!⁠—how fast she slept.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Then by the bed-side, where the faded moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made a dim, silver twilight, soft he set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A table, and, half-anguish’d, threw thereon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A cloth of woven crimson, gold, and jet:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O for some drowsy Morphean amulet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The boisterous, midnight, festive clarion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The kettle-drum, and far-heard clarionet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Affray his ears, though but in dying tone:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hall-door shuts again, and all the noise is gone.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And still she slept an azure-lidded sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In blanched linen, smooth, and lavender’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While he from forth the closet brought a heap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of candied apple, quince, and plum, and gourd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With jellies soother than the creamy curd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lucent syrops, tinct with cinnamon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Manna and dates, in argosy transferr’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Fez; and spiced dainties, every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From silken Samarcand to cedar’d Lebanon.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">These delicates he heap’d with glowing hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On golden dishes and in baskets bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wreathed silver: sumptuous they stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the retired quiet of the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Filling the chilly room with perfume light.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“And now, my love, my seraph fair, awake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art my heaven, and I thine eremite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Open thine eyes, for meek St. Agnes’ sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or I shall drowse beside thee, so my soul doth ache.”</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-231"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Thus whispering, his warm, unnerved arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sank in her pillow. Shaded was her dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the dusk cui’tains:⁠—’t was a midnight charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Impossible to melt as iced stream:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lustrous salvers in the moonlight gleam;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Broad golden fringe upon the carpet lies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seem’d he never, never could redeem</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From such a steadfast spell his lady’s eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So mused awhile, entoil’d in woofed phantasies.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Awakening up, he took her hollow lute,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tumultuous,⁠—and, in chords that tenderest be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He play’d an ancient ditty, long since mute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Provence call’d “<i epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="fr">La belle dame sans mercy</i>:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Close to her ear touching the melody;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith disturb’d, she utter’d a soft moan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He ceased⁠—she panted quick⁠—and suddenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her blue affrayed eyes wide open shone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his knees he sank, pale as smooth-sculptured stone.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Her eyes were open, but she still beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now wide awake, the vision of her sleep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was a painful change, that nigh expell’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blisses of her dream so pure and deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which fair Madeline began to weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And moan forth witless words with many a sigh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While still her gaze on Porphyro would keep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who knelt, with joined hands and piteous eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fearing to move or speak, she look’d so dreamingly.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Ah, Porphyro!” said she, “but even now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy voice was at sweet tremble in mine ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-232"/>
					<span class="i1">Made tuneable with every sweetest vow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those sad eyes were spiritual and clear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How changed thou art! how pallid, chill, and drear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give me that voice again, my Porphyro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those looks immortal, those complainings dear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh leave me not in this eternal woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if thou diest, my Love, I know not where to go.”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Beyond a mortal man impassion’d far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At these voluptuous accents, he arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ethereal, flush’d, and like a throbbing star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seen mid the sapphire heaven’s deep repose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into her dream he melted, as the rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blendeth its odour with the violet,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Solution sweet: meantime the frost-wind blows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Love’s alarum pattering the sharp sleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the window-panes; St. Agnes’ moon hath set.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">’T is dark: quick pattereth the flaw-blown sleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“This is no dream, my bride, my Madeline!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’T is dark: the iced gusts still rave and beat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“No dream, alas! alas! and woe is mine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Porphyro will leave me here to fade and pine.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cruel! what traitor could thee hither bring?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I curse not, for my heart is lost in thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though thou forsakest a deceived thing;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dove forlorn and lost with sick unpruned wing.”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“My Madeline! sweet dreamer! lovely bride!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Say, may I be for aye thy vassal blest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy beauty’s shield, heart-shaped and vermeil dyed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, silver shrine, here will I take my rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After so many hours of toil and quest,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-233"/>
					<span class="i1">A famish’d pilgrim,⁠—saved by miracle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though I have found, I will not rob thy nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saving of thy sweet self; if thou think’st well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To trust, fair Madeline, to no rude infidel.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIX</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Hark! ’t is an elfin storm from faery land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of haggard seeming, but a boon indeed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arise⁠—arise! the morning is at hand:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bloated wassailers will never heed:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us away, my love, with happy speed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There are no ears to hear, or eyes to see,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drown’d all in Rhenish and the sleepy mead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awake! arise! my love, and fearless be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For o’er the southern moors I have a home for thee.”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She hurried at his words, beset with fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For there were sleeping dragons all around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At glaring watch, perhaps, with ready spears⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down the wide stairs a darkling way they found.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all the house was heard no human sound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A chain-droopd lamp was flickering by each door;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The arras, rich with horseman, hawk, and hound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flutter’d in the besieging wind’s uproar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the long carpets rose along the gusty floor.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XLI</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">They glide, like phantoms, into the wide hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like phantoms to the iron porch they glide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where lay the Porter, in uneasy sprawl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a huge empty flagon by his side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wakeful bloodhound rose, and shook his hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his sagacious eye an inmate owns:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By one, and one, the bolts full easy slide:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The chains lie silent on the footworn stones;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The key turns, and the door upon its hinges groans.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-234"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And they are gone: aye, ages long ago</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These lovers fled away into the storm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That night the Baron dreamt of many a woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all his warrior-guests, with shade and form</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of witch, and demon, and large coffin-worm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were long be-nightmared. Angela the old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Died palsy-twitch’d, with meagre face deform:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Beadsman, after thousand aves told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For aye unsought-for slept among his ashes cold.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="ode-on-a-grecian-urn" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ode on a Grecian Urn</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Thou still unravish’d bride of quietness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou foster-child of Silence and slow Time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sylvan historian, who canst thus express</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A flowery tale more sweetly than our rhyme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What leaf-fringed legend haunts about thy shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of deities or mortals, or of both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In Tempe or the dales of Arcady?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What men or gods are these? what maidens loth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What mad pursuit? What struggle to escape?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What pipes and timbrels? What wild ecstacy?</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are sweeter; therefore, ye soft pipes, play on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to the sensual ear, but, more endear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pipe to the spirit ditties of no tone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair youth, beneath the trees, thou canst not leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy song, nor ever can those trees be bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Bold Lover, never, never canst thou kiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though winning near the goal⁠—yet, do not grieve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She cannot fade, though thou hast not thy bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever wilt thou love, and she be fair!</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-235"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">III</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, happy, happy boughs! that cannot shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your leaves, nor ever bid the Spring adieu;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, happy melodist, unwearied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever piping songs for ever new:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More happy love! more happy, happy love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever warm and still to be enjoy’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For ever panting, and for ever young;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All breathing human passion far above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That leaves a heart high-sorrowful and cloy’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A burning forehead, and a parching tongue.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Who are these coming to the sacrifice?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To what green altar, O mysterious priest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lead’st thou that heifer lowing at the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her silken flanks with garlands drest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What little town by river or sea shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or mountain-built with peaceful citadel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Is emptied of this folk, this pious morn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, little town, thy streets for evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will silent be; and not a soul to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why thou art desolate, can e’er return.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">V</h4>
				<p>
					<span>O Attic shade! Fair attitude! with brede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of marble men and maidens overwrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With forest branches and the trodden weed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou, silent form, dost tease us out of thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As doth eternity: Cold Pastoral!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When old age shall this generation waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou shalt remain, in midst of other woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than ours, a friend to man, to whom thou say’st,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Beauty is truth, truth beauty,”⁠—that is all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<div class="newpage" id="page-236"/>
			<article id="ode-on-indolence" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					Ode on Indolence
					<span epub:type="subtitle">“They toil not, neither do they spin.”</span>
				</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h4>
				<p>
					<span>One morn before me were three figures seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With bowed necks, and joined hands, side-faced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one behind the other stepp’d serene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In placid sandals, and in white robes graced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They pass’d, like figures on a marble urn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When shifted round to see the other side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They came again; as when the urn once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is shifted round, the first seen shades return;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they were strange to me, as may betide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With vases, to one deep in Phidian lore.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h4>
				<p>
					<span>How is it, Shadows! that I knew ye not?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How came ye muffled in so hush a mask?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it a silent deep-disguised plot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To steal away, and leave without a task</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My idle days? Ripe was the drowsy hour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blissful cloud of summer-indolence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Benumb’d my eyes; my pulse grew less and less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pain had no sting, and pleasure’s wreath no flower:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, why did ye not melt, and leave my sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Unhaunted quite of all but⁠—nothingness?</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">III</h4>
				<p>
					<span>A third time pass’d they by, and, passing, turn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each one the face a moment whiles to me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then faded, and to follow them I burn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ached for wings, because I knew the three;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first was a fair Maid, and Love her name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second was Ambition, pale of cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And ever watchful with fatigued eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last, whom I love more, the more of blame</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-237"/>
					<span class="i1">Is heap’d upon her, maiden most unmeek,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I knew to be my demon Poesy.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>They faded, and, forsooth! I wanted wings:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O folly! What is Love? and where is it?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for that poor Ambition! it springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From a man’s little heart’s short fever-fit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Poesy!⁠—no,⁠—she has not a joy,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least for me,⁠—so sweet as drowsy noons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And evenings steep’d in honied indolence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, for an age so shelter’d from annoy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I may never know how change the moons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or hear the voice of busy common-sense!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">V</h4>
				<p>
					<span>And once more came they by;⁠—alas! wherefore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My sleep had been embroider’d with dim dreams;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul had been a lawn besprinkled o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With flowers, and stirring shades, and baffled beams:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The morn was clouded, but no shower fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tho’ in her lids hung the sweet tears of May;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The open casement press’d a new-leaved vine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let in the budding warmth and throstle’s lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Shadows! ’t was a time to bid farewell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Upon your skirts had fallen no tears of mine.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>So, ye three Ghosts, adieu! Ye cannot raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My head cool-bedded in the flowery grass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I would not be dieted with praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pet-lamb in a sentimental farce!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fade softly from my eyes and be once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In masque-like figures on the dreamy urn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Farewell! I yet have visions for the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for the day faint visions there is store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Vanish, ye Phantoms! from my idle spright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the clouds, and nevermore return!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<div class="newpage" id="page-238"/>
			<article id="sonnet-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Why did I laugh to-night? No voice will tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No God, no Demon of severe response,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deigns to reply from Heaven or from Hell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then to my human heart I turn at once.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heart 1 Thou and I are here sad and alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I say, why did I laugh? O mortal pain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Darkness! Darkness! ever must I moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To question Heaven and Hell and Heart in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why did I laugh? I know this Being’s lease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My fancy to its utmost blisses spreads;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet would I on this very midnight cease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the world’s gaudy ensigns see in shreds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Verse, Fame, and Beauty are intense indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Death intenser⁠—Death is Life’s high meed.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="ode-to-fanny" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ode to Fanny</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Physician Nature! let my spirit blood!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O ease my heart of verse and let me rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throw me upon thy Tripod, till the flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of stifling numbers ebbs from my full breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A theme! a theme! great Nature! give a theme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Let me begin my dream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I come⁠—I see thee, as thou standest there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beckon me not into the wintry air.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! dearest love, sweet home of all my fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hopes, and joys, and panting miseries,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To-night, if I may guess, thy beauty wears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A smile of such delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As brilliant and as bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when with ravish’d, aching, vassal eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Lost in soft amaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I gaze, I gaze!</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-239"/>
				<p>
					<span>Who now, with greedy looks, eats up my feast?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What stare outfaces now my silver moon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! keep that hand unravished at the least;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Let, let the amorous burn⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But, pr’ythee, do not turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The current of your heart from me so soon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">O! save, in charity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The quickest pulse for me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Save it for me, sweet love! though music breathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Voluptuous visions into the warm air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though swimming through the dance’s dangerous wreath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Be like an April day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Smiling and cold and gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A temperate lily, temperate as fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then, Heaven! there will be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A warmer June for me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Why, this⁠—you’ll say, my Fanny! is not true:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Put your soft hand upon your snowy side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the heart beats: confess⁠—’t is nothing new⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Must not a woman be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A feather on the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sway’d to and fro by every wind and tide?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of as uncertain speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As blow-ball from the mead?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I know it⁠—and to know it is despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To one who loves you as I love, sweet Fanny!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose heart goes fluttering for you everywhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor, when away you roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Dare keep its wretched home:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love, love alone, has pains severe and many:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then, loveliest! keep me free</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From torturing jealousy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! if you prize my subdued soul above</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The poor, the fading, brief pride of an hour;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-240"/>
					<span>Let none profane my Holy See of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or with a rude hand break</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The sacramental cake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let none else touch the just new-budded flower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If not⁠—may my eyes close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Love! on their last repose.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-dream-after-reading-dantes-episode-of-paolo-and-francesca" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Dream, After Reading Dante’s Episode of Paolo and Francesca</h3>
				<p>
					<span>As Hermes once rook to his feathers light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When lulled Argus, baffled, swoon’d and slept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So on a Delphic reed, my idle spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So play’d, so charm’d, so conquer’d, so bereft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dragon-world in all its hundred eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seeing it asleep, so fled away⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to pure Ida with its snow-cold skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor unto Tempe where Jove grieved a day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to that second circle of sad hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where ’mid the gust, the whirlwind, and the flaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rain and hail-stones, lovers need not tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their sorrows. Pale were the sweet lips I saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pale were the lips I kiss’d, and fair the form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I floated with, about that melancholy storm.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="la-belle-dame-sans-merci" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<i xml:lang="fr">La Belle Dame Sans Merci</i>
				</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, what can ail thee, wretched wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone and palely loitering?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sedge is wither’d from the lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And no birds sing.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, what can ail thee, wretched wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So haggard and so woe-begone?</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-241"/>
					<span>The squirrel’s granary is full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the harvest’s done.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">III</h4>
				<p>
					<span>I see a lily on thy brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With anguish moist and fever dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on thy cheek a fading rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast withereth too.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>I met a lady in the meads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full beautiful⁠—a faery’s child;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hair was long, her foot was light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her eyes were wild.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">V</h4>
				<p>
					<span>I set her on my pacing steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nothing else saw all day long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sideways would she lean, and sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A faery’s song.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>I made a garland for her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bracelets too, and fragrant zone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She look’d at me as she did love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made sweet moan.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>She found me roots of relish sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And honey wild, and manna dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sure in language strange she said⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I love thee true.”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>She took me to her elfin grot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there she gazed, and sighed deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there I shut her wild wild eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So kiss’d to sleep.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-242"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</h4>
				<p>
					<span>And there we slumber’d on the moss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there I dream’d⁠—Ah! woe betide!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The latest dream I ever dream’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the cold hill side.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">X</h4>
				<p>
					<span>I saw pale kings, and princes too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pale warriors, death-pale were they all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They cried⁠—“<i xml:lang="fr">La Belle Dame sans Merci</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath thee in thrall!”</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>I saw their starved lips in the gloam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With horrid warning gaped wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I awoke, and found me here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the cold hill side.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>And this is why I sojourn here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone and palely loitering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though the sedge is wither’d from the lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And no birds sing.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="chorus-of-fairies" epub:type="chapter z3998:drama">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Chorus of Fairies</h3>
				<p epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">Fire, Air, Earth, And Water Salamander, Zephyr, Dusketha, and Breama</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salamander</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Happy, happy glowing fire!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Zephyr</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Fragrant air! delicious light!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dusketha</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Let me to my glooms retire!</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-243"/>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Breama</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>I to green-weed rivers bright!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salamander</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Happy, happy glowing fire!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dazzling bowers of soft retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever let my nourish’d wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a bat’s, still wandering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faintly fan your fiery spaces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirit sole in deadly places.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In unhaunted roar and blaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open eyes that never daze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me see the myriad shapes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of men, and beasts, and fish, and apes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Portray’d in many a fiery den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wrought by spumy bitumen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the deep intenser roof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arched every way, aloof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me breathe upon my skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And anger their live tapestries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free from cold, and every care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of chilly rain, and shivering air.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Zephyr</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Spright of Fire! away! away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or your very roundelay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will sear my plumage newly budded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From its quilled sheath, and studded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the self-same dews that fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the May-grown Asphodel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spright of Fire⁠—away! away!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Breama</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Spright of Fire⁠—away! away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zephyr, blue-eyed Faery, turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And see my cool sedge-shaded urn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where it rests its mossy brim </span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid water-mint and cresses dim;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-244"/>
					<span>And th» flowers, in sweet troubles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift their eyes above the bubbles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like our Queen, when she would please</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sleep, and Oberon will tease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love me, blue-eyed Faery! true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soothly I am sick for you.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Zephyr</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Gentle Breama! by the first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Violet young nature nurst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will bathe myself with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So you sometime follow me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my home, far, far, in west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far beyond the search and quest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the golden-browed sun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come with me, o’er tops of trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my fragrant palaces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where they ever floating are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the cherish of a star</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call’d Vesper, who with silver veil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever hides his brilliance pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever gently-drowsed doth keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twilight for the Fays to sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fear not that your watery hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will thirst in drouthy ringlets there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clouds of stored summer rains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt taste, before the stains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the mountain soil they take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And too unlucent for thee make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love thee, crystal Faery, true!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sooth I am as sick for you!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salamander</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Out, ye aguish Faeries, out!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chilly lovers, what a rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep ye with your frozen breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Colder than the mortal death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adder-eyed Dusketha, speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall we leave them, and go seek</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-245"/>
					<span>In the earth’s wide entrails old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Couches warm as theirs is cold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O for a fiery gloom and thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dusketha, so enchantingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freckle-wing’d and lizard-sided!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dusketha</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>By thee, Spright, will I be guided!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I care not for cold or heat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frost and flame, or sparks, or sleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my essence are the same;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I honour more the flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spright of fire, I follow thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wheresoever it may be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the torrid spouts and fountains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Underneath earth-quaked mountains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, at thy supreme desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touch the very pulse of fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With my bare unlidded eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salamander</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Sweet Dusketha! paradise!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Off, ye icy Spirits, fly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frosty creatures of the sky!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dusketha</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Breathe upon them, fiery Spright!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Zephyr</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Breama</b> (<span epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">to each other</span>)
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Away! away to our delight!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salamander</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Go, feed on icicles, while we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bedded in tongued flames will be.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dusketha</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Lead me to these fev’rous glooms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spright of Fire!</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-246"/>
				<h4 class="speech-title">
					<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Breama</b>
				</h4>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Me to the blooms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blue eyed Zephyr of those flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far in the west where the May-cloud lowers:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the beams of still Vesper, where winds are all whist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are shed thro’ the rain and the milder mist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twilight your floating bowers.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="faery-songs" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Faery Songs</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Shed no tear! O shed no tear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flower will bloom another year.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weep no more! O weep no more!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young buds sleep in the root’s white core.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dry your eyes! O dry your eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I was taught in Paradise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ease my breast of melodies⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Shed no tear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Overhead! look overhead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mong the blossoms white and red⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look up, look up⁠—I flutter now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this flush pomegranate bough.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See me! ’t is this silvery bill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever cures the good man’s ill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shed no tear! O shed no tear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flower will bloom another year.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu, Adieu⁠—I fly, adieu,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I vanish in the heaven’s blue⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Adieu, Adieu!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! woe is me! poor silver-wing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I must chant thy lady’s dirge,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-247"/>
					<span>And death to this fair haunt of spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of melody, and streams of flowery verge,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Poor silver-wing! ah! woe is me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">That I must see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These blossoms snow upon thy lady’s pall!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Go, pretty page! and in her ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whisper that the hour is near!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Softly tell her not to fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such calm favonian burial!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Go, pretty page! and soothly tell,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blossoms hang by a melting spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fall they must, ere a star wink thrice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Upon her closed eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now in vain are weeping their last tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At sweet life leaving, and those arbours green,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich dowry from the Spirit of the Spheres,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Alas! poor Queen!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="on-fame" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">On Fame</h3>
				<blockquote class="TODO">
					<p>“You cannot eat your cake and have it too.”</p>
					<footer>
						<p>—Proverb.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>
					<span>How fever’d is that man, who cannot look</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his mortal days with temperate blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who vexes all the leaves of his life’s book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And robs his fair name of its maidenhood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is as if the rose should pluck herself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or the ripe plum finger its misty bloom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if a Naiad, like a meddling elf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should darken her pure grot with muddy gloom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the rose leaves herself upon the brier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For winds to kiss and grateful bees to feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the ripe plum still wears its dim attire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The undisturbed lake has crystal space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why then should man, teasing the world for grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spoil his salvation for a fierce miscreed?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<div class="newpage" id="page-248"/>
			<article id="another-on-fame" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Another on Fame</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Fame, like a wayward girl, will still be coy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To those who woo her with too slavish knees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But makes surrender to some thoughtless boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dotes the more upon a heart at ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She is a Gipsy,⁠—will not speak to those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who have not learnt to be content without her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Jilt, whose ear was never whisper’d close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who thinks they scandal her who talk about her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A very Gipsy is she, Nilus-born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sister-in-law to jealous Potiphar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye lovesick Bards! repay her scorn for scorn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye Artists lovelorn! madmen that ye are!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make your best bow to her and bid adieu,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, if she likes it, she will follow you.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-sleep" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To Sleep</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O soft embalmer of the still midnight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shutting, with careful fingers and benign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our gloom-pleased eyes, embower’d from the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enshaded in forgetfulness divine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O soothest Sleep! if so it please thee, close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In midst of this thine hymn, my willing eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or wait the amen, ere thy poppy throws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around my bed its dewy charities;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then save me, or the passed day will shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my pillow, breeding many woes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save me from curious conscience, that still lords</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its strength for darkness, burrowing like a mole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn the key deftly in the oiled wards,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seal the hushed casket of my soul.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<div class="newpage" id="page-249"/>
			<article id="ode-to-psyche" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ode to Psyche</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h4>
				<p>
					<span>O Goddess! hear these tuneless numbers, wrung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By sweet enforcement and remembrance dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pardon that thy secrets should be sung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even into thine own soft-conched ear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surely I dreamt to-day, or did I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The winged Psyche with awaken’d eyes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wander’d in a forest thoughtlessly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, on the sudden, fainting with surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw two fair creatures, couched side by side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In deepest grass, beneath the whisp’ring roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of leaves and trembled blossoms, where there ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">A brooklet, scarce espied:</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h4>
				<p>
					<span>’Mid hush’d, cool-rooted flowers fragrant eyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blue, silver-white, and budded Tyrian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They lay calm-breathing on the bedded grass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their arms embraced, and their pinions too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their lips touch’d not, but had not bade adieu,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if disjoined by soft-handed slumber,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ready still past kisses to outnumber</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At tender eye-dawn of aurorean love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">The winged boy I knew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who wast thou, O happy, happy dove?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">His Psyche true!</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">III</h4>
				<p>
					<span>O latest-born and loveliest vision far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all Olympus’ faded hierarchy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fairer than Phœbe’s sapphire-region’d star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Vesper, amorous glow-worm of the sky;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fairer than these, though temple thou hast none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Nor altar heap’d with flowers;</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-250"/>
					<span>Nor virgin-choir to make delicious moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Upon the midnight hours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No voice, no lute, no pipe, no incense sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From chain-swung censer teeming;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No shrine, no grove, no oracle, no heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pale-mouth’d prophet dreaming.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>O brightest! though too late for antique vows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too, too late for the fond believing lyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When holy were the haunted forest boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holy the air, the water, and the fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet even in these days so far retired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From happy pieties, thy lucent fans,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fluttering among the faint Olympians,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see, and sing, by my own eyes inspired.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So let me be thy choir, and make a moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Upon the midnight hours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy voice, thy lute, thy pipe, thy incense sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From swinged censer teeming;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy shrine, thy grove, thy oracle, thy heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of pale-mouth’d prophet dreaming.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">V</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Yes, I will be thy priest, and build a fane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In some untrodden region of my mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where branched thoughts, new-grown with pleasant pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of pines shall murmur in the wind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far, far around shall those dark-cluster’d trees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fledge the wild-ridged mountains steep by steep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there by zephyrs, streams, and birds, and bees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moss-lain Dryads shall be lulled to sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the midst of this wide quietness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rosy sanctuary will I dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the wreath’d trellis of a working brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With buds, and bells, and stars without a name.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-251"/>
					<span>With all the gardener Fancy e’er could feign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who breeding flowers, will never breed the same:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there shall be for thee all soft delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">That shadowy thought can win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bright torch, and a casement ope at night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">To let the warm Love in!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-10" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If by dull rhymes our English must be chain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, like Andromeda, the Sonnet sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fetter’d, in spite of pained loveliness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us find out, if we must be constrain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sandals more interwoven and complete</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fit the naked foot of poesy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us inspect the lyre, and weigh the stress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every chord, and see what may be gain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By ear industrious, and attention meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Misers of sound and syllable, no less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Midas of his coinage, let us be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Jealous of dead leaves in the bay-wreath crown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, if we may not let the Muse be free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She will be bound with garlands of her own.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="ode-to-a-nightingale" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ode to a Nightingale</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h4>
				<p>
					<span>My heart aches, and a drowsy numbness pains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My sense, as though of hemlock I had drunk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or emptied some dull opiate to the drains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One minute past, and Lethe-wards had sunk:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is not through envy of thy happy lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But being too happy in thine happiness,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That thou, light-winged Dryad of the trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">In some melodious plot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of beechen green, and shadows numberless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Singest of summer in full-throated ease.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-252"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h4>
				<p>
					<span>O for a draught of vintage! that hath been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cool’d a long age in the deep-delved earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tasting of Flora and the country-green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dance, and Provençal song, and sunburnt mirth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O for a beaker full of the warm South,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of the true, the blushful Hippocrene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With beaded bubbles winking at the brim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And purple-stained mouth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I might drink, and leave the world unseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And with thee fade away into the forest dim:</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">III</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Fade far away, dissolve, and quite forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What thou among the leaves hast never known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weariness, the fever, and the fret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here, where men sit and hear each other groan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where palsy shakes a few, sad, last gray hairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where youth grows pale, and spectre-thin, and dies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Where but to think is to be full of sorrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And leaden-eyed despairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Beauty cannot keep her lustrous eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or new Love pine at them beyond to-morrow.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Away! away! for I will fly to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not charioted by Bacchus and his pards,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on the viewless wings of Poesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though the dull brain perplexes and retards:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already with thee! tender is the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And haply the Queen-Moon is on her throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cluster’d around by all her starry Fays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">But here there is no light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save what from heaven is with the breezes blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through verdurous glooms and winding mossy ways.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-253"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">V</h4>
				<p>
					<span>I cannot see what flowers are at my feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor what soft incense hangs upon the boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, in embalmed darkness, guess each sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith the seasonable month endows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grass, the thicket, and the fruit-tree wild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">White hawthorn, and the pastoral eglantine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fast fading violets cover’d up in leaves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And mid-May’s eldest child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The coming musk-rose, full of dewy wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The murmurous haunt of flies on summer eves.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Darkling I listen; and, for many a time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have been half in love with easeful Death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call’d him soft names in many a mused rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take into the air my quiet breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now more than ever seems it rich to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cease upon the midnight with no pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">While thou art pouring forth thy soul abroad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">In such an ecstacy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still wouldst thou sing, and I have ears in vain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To thy high requiem become a sod.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Thou wast not born for death, immortal Bird!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No hungry generations tread thee down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The voice I hear this passing night was heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In ancient days by emperor and clown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps the self-same song that found a path</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the sad heart of Ruth, when, sick for home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She stood in tears amid the alien corn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">The same that oft-times hath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charm’d magic casements, opening on the foam</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of perilous seas, in faery lands forlorn.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-254"/>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Forlorn! the very word is like a bell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To toll me back from thee to my sole self!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu! the fancy cannot cheat so well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she is famed to do, deceiving elf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adieu! adieu! thy plaintive anthem fades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Past the near meadows, over the still stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Up the hill-side; and now ’t is buried deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">In the next valley-glades:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was it a vision, or a waking dream?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fled is that music:⁠—do I wake or sleep?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="lamia" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Lamia</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a time, before the faery broods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drove Nymph and Satyr from the prosperous woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before King Oberon’s bright diadem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sceptre, and mantle, clasp’d with dewy gem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frighted away the Dryads and the Fauns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From rushes green, and brakes, and cowslipp’d lawns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ever-smitten Hermes empty left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His golden throne, bent warm on amorous theft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From high Olympus had he stolen light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this side of Jove’s clouds, to escape the sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his great summer, and made retreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a forest on the shores of Crete.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For somewhere in that sacred island dwelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nymph, to whom all hoofed Satyrs knelt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At whose white feet the languid Tritons poured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pearls, while on land they wither’d and adored.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fast by the springs where she to bathe was wont,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in those meads where sometimes she might haunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were strewn rich gifts, unknown to any Muse,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-255"/>
					<span>Though Fancy’s casket were unlock’d to choose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, what a world of love was at her feet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Hermes thought, and a celestial heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burnt from his winged heels to either ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from a whiteness, as the lily clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blush’d into roses ’mid his golden hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fallen in jealous curls about his shoulders bare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">From vale to vale, from wood to wood, he flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breathing upon the flowers his passion new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wound with many a river to its head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find where this sweet nymph prepared her secret bed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain; the sweet nymph might nowhere be found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so he rested, on the lonely ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pensive, and full of painful jealousies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Wood Gods, and even the very trees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There as he stood, he heard a mournful voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as once heard, in gentle heart, destroys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All pain but pity: thus the lone voice spake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“When from this wreathed tomb shall I awake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When move in a sweet body fit for life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love, and pleasure, and the ruddy strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hearts and lips! Ah, miserable me!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The God, dove-footed, glided silently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round bush and tree, soft-brushing, in his speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The taller grasses and full-flowering weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until he found a palpitating snake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright, and <i xml:lang="fr">cirque-couchant</i> in a dusky brake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She was a gordian shape of dazzling hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vermilion-spotted, golden, green, and blue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Striped like a zebra, freckled like a pard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eyed like a peacock, and all crimson barr’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of silver moons, that, as she breathed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dissolved, or brighter shone, or interwreathed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their lustres with the gloomier tapestries⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So rainbow-sided, touch’d with miseries,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-256"/>
					<span>She seem’d, at once, some penanced lady elf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some demon’s mistress, or the demon’s self.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her crest she wore a wannish fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprinkled with stars, like Ariadne’s tiar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her head was serpent, but ah, bitter-sweet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had a woman’s mouth with all its pearls complete:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for her eyes⁠—what could such eyes do there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But weep, and weep, that they were born so fair?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Proserpine still weeps for her Sicilian air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her throat was serpent, but the words she spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came, as through bubbling honey, for Love’s sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus; while Hermes on his pinions lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a stoop’d falcon ere he takes his prey:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“Fair Hermes! crown’d with feathers, fluttering light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had a splendid dream of thee last night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw thee sitting, on a throne of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Gods, upon Olympus old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The only sad one; for thou didst not hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soft, lute-finger’d Muses chanting clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor even Apollo when he sang alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deaf to his throbbing throat’s long, long melodious moan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I dreamt I saw thee, robed in purple flakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Break amorous through the clouds, as morning breaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, swiftly as a bright Phœbean dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strike for the Cretan isle; and here thou art!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too gentle Hermes, hast thou found the maid?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat the star of Lethe not delay’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His rosy eloquence, and thus inquired:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou smooth-lipp’d serpent, surely high-inspired!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou beauteous wreath, with melancholy eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possess whatever bliss thou canst devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Telling me only where my nymph is fled,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-257"/>
					<span>Where she doth breathe!” “Bright planet, thou hast said,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Return’d the snake, “but seal with oaths, fair God!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I swear,” said Hermes, “by my serpent rod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by thine eyes, and by thy starry crown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light flew his earnest words, among the blossoms blown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thus again the brilliance feminine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Too frail of heart! for this lost nymph of thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free as the air, invisibly, she strays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About these thornless wilds; her pleasant days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She tastes unseen; unseen her nimble feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave traces in the grass and flowers sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From weary tendrils, and bow’d branches green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She plucks the fruit unseen, she bathes unseen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by my power is her beauty veil’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep it unaffronted, unassail’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the love-glances of unlovely eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Satyrs, Fauns, and blear’d Silenus’ sighs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pale grew her immortality, for woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all these lovers, and she grieved so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I took compassion on her, bade her steep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hair in weïrd syrops, that would keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her loveliness invisible, yet free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wander as she loves, in liberty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt behold her, Hermes, thou alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou wilt, as thou swearest, grant my boon!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, once again, the charmed God began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An oath, and through the serpent’s ears it ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm, tremulous, devout, psalterian.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ravish’d she lifted her Circean head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blush’d a live damask, and swift-lisping said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I was a woman, let me have once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woman’s shape, and charming as before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love a youth of Corinth⁠—O the bliss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me my woman’s form, and place me where he is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stoop, Hermes, let me breathe upon thy brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-258"/>
					<span>And thou shalt see thy sweet nymph even now.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The God on half-shut feathers sank serene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She breathed upon his eyes, and swift was seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of both the guarded nymph near-smiling on the green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was no dream; or say a dream it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Real are the dreams of Gods, and smoothly pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their pleasures in a long immortal dream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One warm, flush’d moment, hovering, it might seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dash’d by the wood-nymph’s beauty, so he burn’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, lighting on the printless verdure, turn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the swoon’d serpent, and with languid arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delicate, put to proof the lithe Caducean charm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So done, upon the nymph his eyes he bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of adoring tears and blandishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And towards her stept: she, like a moon in wane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faded before him, cower’d, nor could restrain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her fearful sobs, self-folding like a flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That faints into itself at evening hour:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the God fostering her chilled hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She felt the warmth, her eyelids open’d bland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, like new flowers at morning song of bees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bloom’d, and gave up her honey to the lees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the green-recessed woods they flew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor grew they pale, as mortal lovers do.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Left to herself, the serpent now began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To change; her elfin blood in madness ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her mouth foam’d, and the grass, therewith besprent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wither’d at dew so sweet and virulent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyes in torture fix’d, and anguish drear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hot, glazed, and wide, with lid-lashes all sear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flash’d phosphor and sharp sparks, without one cooling tear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The colours all inflamed throughout her train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She writhed about, convulsed with scarlet pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A deep volcanian yellow took the place</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-259"/>
					<span>Of all her milder-mooned body’s grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as the lava ravishes the mead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spoilt all her silver mail, and golden brede:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made gloom of all her frecklings, streaks and bars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eclipsed her crescents, and lick’d up her stars:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that, in moments few, she was undrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all her sapphires, greens, and amethyst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rubious-argent: of all these bereft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing but pain and ugliness were left.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still shone her crown; that vanish’d, also she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melted and disappear’d as suddenly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the air, her new voice luting soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cried, “Lycius! gentle Lycius!”⁠—Borne aloft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the bright mists about the mountains hoar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These words dissolved: Crete’s forests heard no more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Whither fled Lamia, now a lady bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A full-born beauty new and exquisite?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fled into that valley they pass o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who go to Corinth from Cenchreas’ shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rested at the foot of those wild hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rugged founts of the Peræan rills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of that other ridge whose barren back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretches, with all its mist and cloudy rack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>South-westward to Cleone. There she stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About a young bird’s flutter from a wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair, on a sloping green of mossy tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a clear pool, wherein she passioned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see herself escaped from so sore ills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While her robes flaunted with the daffodils.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Ah, happy Lycius!⁠—for she was a maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More beautiful than ever twisted braid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or sigh’d, or blush’d, or on spring-flowered lea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spread a green kirtle to the minstrelsy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A virgin purest lipp’d, yet in the lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love deep learned to the red heart’s core:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-260"/>
					<span>Not one hour old, yet of sciential brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To unperplex bliss from its neighbour pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Define their pettish limits, and estrange</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their points of contact, and swift counterchange;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intrigue with the specious chaos, and dispart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its most ambiguous atoms with sure art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though in Cupid’s college she had spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet days a lovely graduate, still unshent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kept his rosy terms in idle languishment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Why this fair creature chose so fairily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the wayside to linger, we shall see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first ’t is fit to tell how she could muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dream, when in the serpent prison-house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all she list, strange or magnificent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How, ever, where she will’d, her spirit went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether to faint Elysium, or where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down through tress-lifting waves the Nereids fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wind into Thetis’ bower by many a pearly stair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or where God Bacchus drains his cups divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretch’d out, at ease, beneath a glutinous pine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or where in Pluto’s gardens palatine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mulciber’s columns gleam in far piazzian line.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometimes into cities she would send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dream, with feast and rioting to blend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once, while among mortals dreaming thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She saw the young Corinthian Lycius</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charioting foremost in the envious race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a young Jove with calm uneager face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fell into a swooning love of him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now on the moth-time of that evening dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would return that way, as well she knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Corinth from the shore; for freshly blew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eastern soft wind, and his galley now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grated the quay-stones with her brazen prow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In port Cenchreas, from Egina isle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh anchor’d; whither he had been awhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sacrifice to Jove, whose temple there</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-261"/>
					<span>Waits with high marble doors for blood and incense rare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jove heard his vows, and better’d his desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by some freakful chance he made retire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his companions, and set forth to walk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps grown wearied of their Corinth talk:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the solitary hills he fared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thoughtless at first, but ere eve’s star appear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His phantasy was lost, where reason fades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the calm’d twilight of Platonic shades.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lamia beheld him coming, near, more near⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close to her passing, in indifference drear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His silent sandals swept the mossy green;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So neighbour’d to him, and yet so unseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She stood: he pass’d, shut up in mysteries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mind wrapp’d like his mantle, while her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow’d his steps, and her neck regal white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn’d⁠—syllabling thus, “Ah, Lycius bright!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And will you leave me on the hills alone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius, look back! and be some pity shown.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did; not with cold wonder fearingly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Orpheus-like at an Eurydice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For so delicious were the words she sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seem’d he had loved them a whole summer long:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon his eyes had drunk her beauty up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving no drop in the bewildering cup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still the cup was full,⁠—while he, afraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest she should vanish ere his lips had paid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Due adoration, thus began to adore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her soft look growing coy, she saw his chain so sure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Leave thee alone! Look back! Ah, Goddess, see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether my eyes can ever turn from thee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For pity do not this sad heart belie⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as thou vanishest so I shall die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stay! though a Naiad of the rivers, stay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thy far wishes will thy streams obey:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-262"/>
					<span>Stay! though the greenest woods be thy domain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone they can drink up the morning rain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though a descended Pleiad, will not one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thine harmonious sisters keep in tune</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy spheres, and as thy silver proxy shine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sweetly to these ravish’d ears of mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came thy sweet greeting, that if thou shouldst fade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy memory will waste me to a shade:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For pity do not melt!”⁠—“If I should stay,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said Lamia, “here, upon this floor of clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pain my steps upon these flowers too rough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What canst thou say or do of charm enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dull the nice remembrance of my home?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou canst not ask me with thee here to roam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over these hills and vales, where no joy is,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empty of immortality and bliss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art a scholar, Lycius, and must know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That finer spirits cannot breathe below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In human climes, and live: Alas! poor youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What taste of purer air hast thou to soothe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My essence? What serener palaces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I may all my many senses please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by mysterious sleights a hundred thirsts appease?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It cannot be⁠—Adieu!” So said, she rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tiptoe with white arms spread. He, sick to lose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The amorous promise of her lone complain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swoon’d murmuring of love, and pale with pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cruel lady, without any show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sorrow for her tender favourite’s woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rather, if her eyes could brighter be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With brighter eyes and slow amenity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put her new lips to his, and gave afresh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The life she had so tangled in her mesh:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he from one trance was weakening</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into another, she began to sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy in beauty, life, and love, and every thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-263"/>
					<span>A song of love, too sweet for earthly lyres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While, like held breath, the stars drew in their panting fires.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then she whisper’d in such trembling tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As those who, safe together met alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the first time through many anguish’d days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Use other speech than looks; bidding him raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His drooping head, and clear his soul of doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that she was a woman, and without</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Any more subtle fluid in her veins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than throbbing blood, and that the self-same pains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inhabited her frail-strung heart as his.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And next she wonder’d how his eyes could miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her face so long in Corinth, where, she said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She dwelt but half retired, and there had led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Days happy as the gold coin could invent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the aid of love; yet in content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she saw him, as once she pass’d him by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where ’gainst a column he leant thoughtfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Venus’ temple porch, ’mid baskets heap’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of amorous herbs and flowers, aewly reap’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Late on that eve, as ’t was the night before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Adonian feast; whereof she saw no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wept alone those days, for why should she adore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius from death awoke into amaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see her still, and singing so sweet lays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then from amaze into delight he fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear her whisper woman’s lore so well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every word she spake enticed him on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To unperplex’d delight and pleasure known.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the mad poets say whate’er they please</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the sweets of Fairies, Peris, Goddesses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is not such a treat among them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haunters of cavern, lake, and waterfall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a real woman, lineal indeed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Pyrrha’s pebbles or old Adam’s seed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus gentle Lamia judged, and judged aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-264"/>
					<span>That Lycius could not love in half a fright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So threw the goddess off, and won his heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More pleasantly by playing woman’s part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With no more awe than what her beauty gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, while it smote, still guaranteed to save.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius to all made eloquent reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marrying to every word a twin-born sigh:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And last, pointing to Corinth, ask’d her sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ’t was too far that night for her soft feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The way was short, for Lamia’s eagerness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made, by a spell, the triple league decrease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a few paces; not at all surmised</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By blinded Lycius, so in her comprised:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They pass’d the city gates, he knew not how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So noiseless, and he never thought to know.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">As men talk in a dream, so Corinth all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throughout her palaces imperial,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all her populous streets and temples lewd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mutter’d, like tempest in the distance brew’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the wide-spreaded night above her towers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men, women, rich and poor, in the cool hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shuffled their sandals o’er the pavement white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Companion’d or alone; while many a light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flared, here and there, from wealthy festivals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And threw their moving shadows on the walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or found them cluster’d in the corniced shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some arch’d temple door, or dusky colonnade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Muffling his face, of greeting friends in fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her fingers he press’d hard, as one came near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With curl’d gray beard, sharp eyes, and smooth bald crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slow-stepp’d, and robed in philosophic gown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius shrank closer, as they met and past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into his mantle, adding wings to haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While hurried Lamia trembled: “Ah,” said he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why do you shudder, love, so ruefully?</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-265"/>
					<span>Why does your tender palm dissolve in dew?”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I’m wearied,” said fair Lamia: “tell me who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is that old man? I cannot bring to mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His features:⁠—Lycius! wherefore did you blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yourself from his quick eyes?” Lycius replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“’T is Apollonius sage, my trusty guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And good instructor; but to-night he seems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ghost of folly haunting my sweet dreams.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">While yet he spake they had arrived before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pillar’d porch, with lofty portal door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where hung a silver lamp, whose phosphor glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reflected in the slabbed steps below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mild as a star in water; for so new</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so unsullied was the marble hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So through the crystal polish, liquid fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran the dark veins, that none but feet divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could e’er have touch’d there. Sounds Æolian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breathed from the hinges, as the ample span</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the wide doors disclosed a place unknown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some time to any, but those two alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a few Persian mutes, who that same year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were seen about the markets: none knew where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could inhabit; the most curious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were foil’d, who watch’d to trace them to their house:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but the flitter-winged verse must tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For truth’s sake, what woe afterwards befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T would humour many a heart to leave them thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shut from the busy world of more incredulous.</span>
				</p>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h4>
				<p>
					<span>Love in a hut, with water and a crust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is⁠—Love, forgive us!⁠—cinders, ashes, dust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love in a palace is perhaps at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More grievous torment than a hermit’s fast:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-266"/>
					<span>That is a doubtful tale from faery land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard for the non-elect to understand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had Lycius lived to hand his story down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He might have given the moral a fresh frown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or clench’d it quite: but too short was their bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To breed distrust and hate, that make the soft voice hiss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, there, nightly, with terrific glare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love, jealous grown of so complete a pair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hover’d and buzz’d his wings, with fearful roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the lintel of their chamber door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down the passage cast a glow upon the floor.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">For all this came a ruin: side by side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were enthroned, in the even tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a couch, near to a curtaining</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose airy texture, from a golden string,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Floated into the room, and let appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unveil’d the summer heaven, blue and clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt two marble shafts:⁠—there they reposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where use had made it sweet, with eyelids closed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saving a tithe which love still open kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they might see each other while they almost slept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When from the slope side of a suburb hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deafening the swallow’s twitter, came a thrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of trumpets⁠—Lycius started⁠—the sounds fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But left a thought, a buzzing in his head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the first time, since first he harbour’d in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That purple-lined palace of sweet sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spirit pass’d beyond its golden bourn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the noisy world almost forsworn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lady, ever watchful, penetrant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw this with pain, so arguing a want</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of something more, more than her empery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of joys; and she began to moan and sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he mused beyond her, knowing well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That but a moment’s thought is passion’s passing bell.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-267"/>
					<span>“Why do you sigh, fair creature?” whisper’d he:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why do you think?” return’d she tenderly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“You have deserted me;⁠—where am I now?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not in your heart while care weighs on your brow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, no, you have dismiss’d me; and I go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From your breast houseless: aye, it must be so.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He answer’d, bending to her open eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he was mirror’d small in paradise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My silver planet, both of eve and morn!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why will you plead yourself so sad forlorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I am striving how to fill my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With deeper crimson, and a double smart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How to entangle, trammel up and snare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your soul in mine, and labyrinth you there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the hid scent in an unbudded rose?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, a sweet kiss⁠—you see your mighty woes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My thoughts! shall I unveil them? Listen then!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What mortal hath a prize, that other men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May be confounded and abash’d withal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lets it sometimes pace abroad majestical,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And triumph, as in thee I should rejoice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the hoarse alarm of Corinth’s voice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let my foes choke, and my friends shout afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While through the thronged streets your bridal car</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wheels round its dazzling spokes.”⁠—The lady’s cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembled; she nothing said, but, pale and meek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arose and knelt before him, wept a rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sorrows at his words; at last with pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beseeching him, the while his hand she wrung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To change his purpose. He thereat was stung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perverse, with stronger fancy to reclaim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her wild and timid nature to his aim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, for all his love, in self despite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against his better self, he took delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Luxurious in her sorrows, soft and new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His passion, cruel grown, took on a hue</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-268"/>
					<span>Fierce and sanguineous as ’t was possible</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one whose brow had no dark veins to swell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fine was the mitigated fury, like</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo’s presence when in act to strike</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The serpent⁠—Ha! the serpent! certes, she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was none. She burnt, she loved the tyranny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, all subdued, consented to the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When to the bridal he should lead his paramour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whispering in midnight silence, said the youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sure some sweet name thou hast, though, by my truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have not ask’d it, ever thinking thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not mortal, but of heavenly progeny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As still I do. Hast any mortal name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit appellation for this dazzling frame?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or friends or kinsfolk on the citied earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To share our marriage feast and nuptial mirth?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I have no friends,” said Lamia, “no, not one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My presence in wide Corinth hardly known:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My parents’ bones are in their dusty urns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sepulchred, where no kindled incense burns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing all their luckless race are dead, save me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I neglect the holy rite for thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as you list invite your many guests;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if, as now it seems, your vision rests</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With any pleasure on me, do not bid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Apollonius⁠—from him keep me hid.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius, perplex’d at words so blind and blank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made close inquiry; from whose touch she shrank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feigning a sleep; and he to the dull shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of deep sleep in a moment was betray’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">It was the custom then to bring away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bride from home at blushing shut of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Veil’d, in a chariot, heralded along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By strewn flowers, torches, and a marriage song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With other pageants: but this fair unknown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not a friend. So being left alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-269"/>
					<span>(Lycius was gone to summon all his kin,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knowing surely she could never win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His foolish heart from its mad pompousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She set herself, high-thoughted, how to dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The misery in fit magnificence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She did so, but ’t is doubtful how and whence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came, and who were her subtle servitors.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the halls, and to and from the doors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a noise of wings, till in short space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glowing banquet-room shone with wide-arched grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A haunting music, sole perhaps and lone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supportress of the faery-roof, made moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throughout, as fearful the whole charm might fade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh carved cedar, mimicking a glade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of palm and plantain, met from either side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High in the midst, in honour of the bride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two palms and then two plantains, and so on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From either side their stems branch’d one to one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All down the aisled place; and beneath all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There ran a stream of lamps straight on from wall to wall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So canopied, lay an untasted feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Teeming with odours. Lamia, regal drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silently paced about, and as she went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pale contented sort of discontent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mission’d her viewless servants to enrich</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fretted splendour of each nook and niche.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the tree-stems, marbled plain at first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came jasper panels; then, anon, there burst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth creeping imagery of slighter trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the larger wove in small intricacies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Approving all, she faded at self-will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shut the chamber up, close, hush’d and still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Complete and ready for the revels rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When dreadful guests would come to spoil her solitude.</span>
				</p>
				<div class="newpage" id="page-270"/>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">The day appear’d, and all the gossip rout.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O senseless Lycius! Madman! wherefore flout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silent-blessing fate, warm cloister’d hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And show to common eyes these secret bowers?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The herd approach’d; each guest, with busy brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arriving at the portal, gazed amain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And enter’d marvelling: for they knew the street,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remember’d it from childhood all complete</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a gap, yet ne’er before had seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That royal porch, that high-built fair demesne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So in they hurried all, mazed, curious and keen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save one, who look’d thereon with eye severe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with calm-planted steps walk’d in austere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T was Apollonius: something too he laugh’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though some knotty problem, that had daft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His patient thought, had now begun to thaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And solve and melt:⁠—’t was just as he foresaw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">He met within the murmurous vestibule</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His young disciple. “’T is no common rule,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius,” said he, “for uninvited guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To force himself upon you, and infest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an unbiddden presence the bright throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of younger friends; yet must I do this wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you forgive me.” Lycius blush’d, and led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old man through the inner doors broadspread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With reconciling words and courteous mien</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turning into sweet milk the sophist’s spleen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Of wealthy lustre was the banquet-room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill’d with pervading brilliance and perfume:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before each lucid panel fuming stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A censer fed with myrrh and spiced wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each by a sacred tripod held aloft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose slender feet wide-swerved upon the soft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wool-woofed carpets: fifty wreaths of smoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From fifty censers their light voyage took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the high roof, still mimick’d as they rose</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-271"/>
					<span>Along the mirror’d walls by twin-clouds odorous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve sphered tables, by silk seats inspher’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High as the level of a man’s breast rear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On libbard’s paws, upheld the heavy gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of cups and goblets, and the store thrice told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ceres’ horn, and, in huge vessels, wine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came from the gloomy tun with merry shine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus loaded with a feast the tables stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each shrining in the midst the image of a God.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">When in an antechamber every guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had felt the cold full sponge to pleasure press’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By ministering slaves, upon his hands and feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fragrant oils with ceremony meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pour’d on his hair, they all moved to the feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In white robes, and themselves in order placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around the silken couches, wondering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence all this mighty cost and blaze of wealth could spring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Soft went the music the soft air along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While fluent Greek a vowel’d under-song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept up among the guests, discoursing low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first, for scarcely was the wine at flow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when the happy vintage touch’d their brains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Louder they talk, and louder come the strains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of powerful instruments:⁠—the gorgeous dyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The space, the splendour of the draperies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The roof of awful richness, nectarous cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beautiful slaves, and Lamia’s self, appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, when the wine has done its rosy deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every soul from human trammels freed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more so strange; for merry wine, sweet wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will make Elysian shades not too fair, too divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon was God Bacchus at meridian height;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flush’d were their cheeks, and bright eyes double bright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Garlands of every green, and every scent</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-272"/>
					<span>From vales deflower’d, or forest-trees branch-rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In baskets of bright osier’d gold were brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High as the handles heap’d, to suit the thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every guest: that each, as he did please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might fancy-fit his brows, silk-pillow’d at his ease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">What wreath for Lamia? What for Lycius?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What for the sage, old Apollonius?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her aching forehead be there hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The leaves of willow and of adder’s tongue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for the youth, quick, let us strip for him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thyrsus, that his watching eyes may swim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into forgetfulness; and, for the sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let spear-grass and the spiteful thistle wage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>War on his temples. Do not all charms fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the mere touch of cold philosophy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was an awful rainbow once in heaven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We know her woof, her texture; she is given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the dull catalogue of common things.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Philosophy will clip an Angel’s wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conquer all mysteries by rule and line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empty the haunted air, and gnomed mine⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unweave a rainbow, as it erewhile made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tender-person’d Lamia melt into a shade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By her glad Lycius sitting, in chief place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce saw in all the room another face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, checking his love trance, a cup he took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full brimm’d, and opposite sent forth a look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Cross the broad table, to beseech a glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his old teacher’s wrinkled countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pledge him. The bald-head philosopher</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had fix’d his eye, without a twinkle or stir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full on the alarmed beauty of the bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brow-beating her fair form, and troubling her sweet pride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycius then press’d her hand, with devout touch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As pale it lay upon the rosy couch:</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-273"/>
					<span>’T was icy, and the cold ran through his veins;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then sudden it grew hot, and all the pains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of an unnatural heat shot to his heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lamia, what means this? Wherefore dost thou start?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Know’st thou that man?” Poor Lamia answer’d not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gazed into her eyes, and not a jot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Own’d they the lovelorn piteous appeal:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More, more he gazed: his human senses reel:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some hungry spell that loveliness absorbs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no recognition in those orbs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lamia!” he cried⁠—and no soft-toned reply.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The many heard, and the loud revelry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew hush: the stately music no more breathes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The myrtle sicken’d in a thousand wreaths.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By faint degrees, voice, lute, and pleasure ceased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A deadly silence step by step increased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until it seem’d a horrid presence there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a man but felt the terror in his hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lamia!” he shriek’d; and nothing but the shriek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its sad echo did the silence break.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Begone, foul dream!” he cried, gazing again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the bride’s face, where now no azure vein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wander’d on fair-spaced temples; no soft bloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Misted the cheek; no passion to illume</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deep-recessed vision:⁠—all was blight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lamia, no longer fair, there sat a deadly white.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Shut, shut those juggling eyes, thou ruthless man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn them aside, wretch! or the righteous ban</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the Gods, whose dreadful images</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here represent their shadowy presences,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May pierce them on the sudden with the thorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of painful blindness; leaving thee forlorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In trembling dotage to the feeblest fright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of conscience, for their long-offended might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all thine impious proud-heart sophistries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unlawful magic, and enticing lies.</span>
					<br/>
					<div class="newpage" id="page-274"/>
					<span>Corinthians! look upon that gray-beard wretch!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark how, possess’d, his lashless eyelids stretch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around his demon eyes! Corinthians, see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sweet bride withers at their potency.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Fool!” said the sophist, in an under-tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gruff with contempt; which a death-nighing moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Lycius answer’d, as heart-struck and lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sank supine beside the aching ghost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Fool! Fool!” repeated he, while his eyes still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Relented not, nor moved; “from every ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life have I preserved thee to this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shall I see thee made a serpent’s prey?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Lamia breathed death breath; the sophist’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a sharp spear, went through her utterly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keen, cruel, perceant, stinging: she, as well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As her weak hand could any meaning tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Motion’d him to be silent; vainly so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He look’d and look’d again a level⁠—No!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“A serpent!” echoed he; no sooner said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than with a frightful scream she vanished:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Lycius’ arms were empty of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As were his limbs of life, from that same night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the high couch he lay!⁠—his friends came round⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supported him⁠—no pulse or breath they found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in its marriage robe, the heavy body wound.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<div class="newpage" id="page-275"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
