<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Verses to Fanny Brawne</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="verses-to-fanny-brawne" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Verses to Fanny Brawne</h2>
			<article id="sonnet-11" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The day is gone, and all its sweets are gone!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet voice, sweet lips, soft hand, and softer breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm breath, light whisper, tender semi-tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bright eyes, accomplish’d shape, and lang’rous waist!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faded the flower and all its budded charms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faded the sight of beauty from my eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faded the shape of beauty from my arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faded the voice, warmth, whiteness, paradise!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vanish’d unseasonably at shut of eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the dusk holiday⁠—or holinight⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fragrant-curtain’d love begins to weave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The woof of darkness thick, for hid delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as I’ve read love’s missal through to-day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’ll let me sleep, seeing I fast and pray.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="lines-to-fanny" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Lines to Fanny</h3>
				<p>
					<span>What can I do to drive away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remembrance from my eyes? for they have seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye, an hour ago, my brilliant Queen!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touch has a memory. O say, love, say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What can I do to kill it and be free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In my old liberty?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When every fair one that I saw was fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enough to catch me in but half a snare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not keep me there:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, howe’er poor or particolour’d things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My muse had wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever ready was to take her course</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither I bent her force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unintellectual, yet divine to me;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divine, I say!⁠—What sea-bird o’er the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is a philosopher the while he goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Winging along where the great water throes?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">How shall I do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To get anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those moulted feathers, and so mount once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above, above</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The reach of fluttering Love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make him cower lowly while I soar?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I gulp wine? No, that is vulgarism,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A heresy and schism,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foisted into the canon law of love;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No,⁠—wine is only sweet to happy men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More dismal cares</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seize on me unawares,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where shall I learn to get my piece again?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To banish thoughts of that most hateful land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dungeoner of my friends, that wicked strand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where they were wreck’d and live a wrecked life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That monstrous region, whose dull rivers pour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever from their sordid urns unto the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unown’d of any weedy-haired gods;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose winds, all zephyrless, hold scourging rods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Iced in the great lakes, to afflict mankind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose rank-grown forests, frosted, black, and blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would fright a Dryad; whose harsh herbaged meads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make lean and lank the starved ox while he feeds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There bad flowers have no scent, birds no sweet song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And great unerring Nature once seems wrong.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O, for some sunny spell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dissipate the shadows of this hell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say they are gone,⁠—with the new dawning light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steps forth my lady bright!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, let me once more rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul upon that dazzling breast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let once again these aching arms be placed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tender gaolers of thy waist!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let me feel that warm breath here and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To spread a rapture in my very hair,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, the sweetness of the pain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me those lips again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enough! Enough! it is enough for me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dream of thee!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-fanny" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To Fanny</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I cry your mercy⁠—pity⁠—love⁠—aye, love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Merciful love that tantalizes not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One-thoughted, never-wandering, guileless love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unmask’d, and being seen⁠—without a blot!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! let me have thee whole,⁠—all⁠—all⁠—be mine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shape, that fairness, that sweet minor zest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love, your kiss,⁠—those hands, those eyes divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That warm, white, lucent, million-pleasured breast,⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yourself⁠—your soul⁠—in pity give me all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withhold no atom’s atom, or I die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or living on perhaps, your wretched thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forget, in the mist of idle misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life’s purposes⁠—the palate of my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Losing its gust, and my ambition blind!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
